InterStellar 2.0: Fine-grained stream–guided HW/SW co-design for 
multi-channel DRAM performance steering
Abdelrhman Mohamed Abotaleba
,∗, Maziar Goudarzib
Reza Azimib
, Mohamed Hassana,c
a Electrical and Computer Engineering, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
b Huawei Technologies, Canada Research Center, Markham, Ontario, Canada
c American University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
, Tomasz Czajkowskib
,∗
, 
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Multiple channels
Memory controller
DRAM
Intelligent batching
Streams
A B S T R A C T
The gap between processor speed and memory latency limits system scalability, especially in data-intensive 
and artificial intelligence workloads where memory-level parallelism and bandwidth efficiency are critical. 
Prior work (InterStellar) showed that hardware/software (HW/SW) co-design can expose program-level access 
streams to the memory system, enabling more informed memory-controller (MC) scheduling. This work extends 
that approach to high-bandwidth, multi-channel platforms. We present InterStellar 2.0, a scalable HW/SW 
co-design that: (1) supports multi-channel dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) by partitioning stream 
batches across channels, allowing each channel to operate independently without cross-channel coordination; 
and (2) introduces fine-grained stream descriptors so software can distinguish distinct access patterns, even 
within the same data structure. These capabilities improve DRAM locality management and allow the MC 
to issue future requests efficiently. We evaluate InterStellar 2.0 on an 8-core RISC-V platform across DRAM 
configurations from 1 to 32 channels. At 32 channels, InterStellar 2.0 improves performance by up to 2.92×
and increases memory bandwidth by up to 2.83× over a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) controller. Fine
grained stream tracking alone improves performance by up to 1.35×. Overall, InterStellar 2.0 shows that 
stream-aware HW/SW co-design is practical, compatible, and scalable for multi-channel memory systems 
without ISA changes or inter-channel communication.
1. Introduction
The widening gap between processing capabilities and main-memory 
service time remains a fundamental limiter for modern multicore and 
manycore systems [1–4]. Even with wide out-of-order cores, deep 
memory-level parallelism, and aggressive hardware prefetching [5
10], the latency of accessing off-chip dynamic random-access memory 
(DRAM) remains on the order of hundreds of cycles and has improved 
only modestly across recent DRAM generations [9,11]. This bottle
neck is particularly evident in memory-intensive workloads such as 
scientific simulation, sparse/tensor kernels, graph and data analytics, 
and modern artificial intelligence (AI) inference and training pipelines. 
These workloads may be executed on diverse compute substrates, from 
conventional CPU cores to GPUs, FPGA fabrics, and domain-specific 
accelerators, but they share a common bottleneck: their performance 
is ultimately limited by how efficiently off-chip DRAM can service the 
resulting memory-request stream. InterStellar 2.0 targets this shared 
∗ Corresponding authors.
main-memory bottleneck at the LLC-miss/memory-controller interface, 
making it applicable to any DRAM requestor that generates memory 
traffic to the same multi-channel subsystem. In these workloads, overall 
throughput is often constrained by how efficiently the memory system 
delivers data rather than by the available arithmetic capability. Recent 
industry reports further highlight that large-scale AI and streaming 
analytics deployments are increasingly provisioned based on memory 
bandwidth, and that next-generation double data rate 5 (DDR5)–class 
systems and multi-channel memory subsystems are primarily adopted 
to increase delivered bandwidth per socket [12–14]. While we ref
erence DDR5-class features (e.g., subchannelization) to motivate rel
evance to emerging high-bandwidth platforms, our evaluation uses 
DDR4 timing as a widely deployed and well-established baseline. 
Commodity DRAM subsystems are evolving toward higher concur
rency rather than fundamentally lower per-access latency. Specifically, 
DDR5-class dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs) provide multi
ple semi-independent subchannels per module, each with its own 
E-mail addresses: abotalea@mcmaster.ca (A.M. Abotaleb), maziar.goudarzi@huawei.com (M. Goudarzi), tomasz.czajkowski@huawei.com (T. Czajkowski), 
reza.azimi1@huawei.com (R. Azimi), mohamed.hassan@mcmaster.ca (M. Hassan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2026.103832
Received 29 November 2025; Received in revised form 3 March 2026; Accepted 1 May 2026
Available online 12 May 2026 
1383-7621/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
command/address interface [10,15]. Server-class platforms and high 
performance systems-on-chip (SoCs) further integrate multiple external 
DRAM channels and interleave physical addresses across channels, 
often at cache-line granularity, so that consecutive memory lines are 
striped across channels [9,16]. This organization increases aggregate 
delivered bandwidth by allowing multiple memory controllers (MCs) to 
operate in parallel; however, it also fragments what software perceives 
as a single logical access stream across channels, so no single controller 
observes the entire stream.
Moreover, workloads in AI and scientific computing exhibit struc
tured but nontrivial access behavior, such as a simple vector accessed 
within a loop [17]. This is an informal definition of the streaming 
access. Recent work exploits known streaming access to enrich the 
memory representation in modern systems [18–24]. However, stream
ing access patterns appear not only in simple vector-style loops but 
also in more complex kernels such as multidimensional stencils, tensor 
sweeps, and structured-grid updates common in scientific simulation 
and AI/data analytics pipelines [25–27]. These kernels often read or 
update multiple logically related regions of an array within the same 
primitive structure (e.g., several neighboring rows or planes). As sys
tems scale to more cores and higher bandwidth, preserving efficiency 
for these structured yet intertwined memory streams becomes increas
ingly important. DRAM serves data at row granularity: opening a row 
places it in a small row buffer, making subsequent accesses to that row 
fast row hits, while switching rows needs to close the opened rows first, 
which adds latency [9,10]. Conventional memory controllers attempt 
to manage throughput and latency using hardware-only techniques. A 
typical controller employs the first-ready, first-come, first-served (FR
FCFS) policy to prioritize requests that hit in the open row and relies on 
adaptive page policies (open-page vs. close-page) that speculate, based 
on recent history, when to keep a row open or to close it. In parallel, 
hardware prefetchers attempt to overlap latency by injecting predicted 
future requests into the cache hierarchy and memory system. However, 
these mechanisms operate without explicit knowledge of which loop, 
data structure, or kernel instance generated each access, and they must 
react to whatever requests arrive at the controller under cache-queue 
pressure from miss status holding registers (MSHRs), cache pollution, 
and queuing contention [28–36]. As a result, commodity controllers 
cannot (i) deliberately construct long runs of predictable, row-friendly 
accesses for a given memory stream once a row is opened, or (ii) 
make row-management decisions using advance knowledge of how that 
stream will evolve in the near future.
InterStellar [37] addressed these limitations by introducing a hard
ware/software (HW/SW) co-design that exposes stream-level intent from 
software to hardware without requiring instruction set architecture 
(ISA) or operating system (OS) changes. In InterStellar, the compiler 
identifies regular access patterns and emits compact per-stream de
scriptors that capture properties such as base address, stride, loop 
bounds, and linkage to enclosing loops. These descriptors are con
veyed to hardware using existing architectural mechanisms and are 
consumed by a central engine called the Nucleus, which associates last
level cache (LLC) misses with their originating streams. The memory 
controller then applies two coordinated policies using this informa
tion. First, the intelligent page policy (iPP) manages DRAM row-buffer 
residency per stream, allowing the controller to make explicit row
management decisions. Second, the deterministic batching mechanism 
(iBatch) proactively issues bursts of known near-term accesses for that 
same stream and stages the returned data locally at the controller. 
This enables future core requests to be satisfied without repeatedly 
reopening the same DRAM row and without relying on speculative 
or potentially disruptive cache prefetch traffic. Evaluated on an 8
core system, InterStellar improved end-to-end performance by up to 
2.72× (PolyBench [38]), 1.24× Rodinia [39], 1.84× HPCG [40], and 
1.47× (Parboil [41]) over a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) DDR 
controller, while requiring no ISA extensions, and no changes to the 
OS/application programming model.
While InterStellar demonstrated that lightweight HW/SW cooper
ation can substantially improve main-memory efficiency, two scaling 
questions naturally arise as platforms and workloads evolve:
(1) Many-channel memory systems. Modern high-bandwidth systems 
increasingly use multiple DRAM channels with cache-line interleaving 
across channels [10,15,16]. In such systems, what software views as 
a single memory stream is physically serviced by multiple controllers 
operating in parallel. To extend the benefits of InterStellar to these 
systems, a stream-aware controller must scale across channels without 
introducing heavy cross-channel communication or global bottlenecks, 
while allowing per-channel controllers to make local decisions that still 
reflect software intent.
(2) Richer stream structures within complex kernels. In many scien
tific and AI workloads (e.g., multi-dimensional stencils and structured
grid updates [25–27]), what appears as one logical stream at the 
source level may actually consist of multiple distinct access patterns 
that progress concurrently within the same loop body. Treating these 
collectively as a single coarse-grained stream can blur their behavior 
inside the controller. A more expressive interface that enables software 
to describe these access patterns separately allows hardware to manage 
them with finer granularity.
To address these questions, this work presents InterStellar 2.0, 
which evolves InterStellar along these two axes while preserving its 
original design goals. InterStellar 2.0 retains InterStellar’s foundation: 
software communicates per-stream intent through compact descriptors 
with no ISA changes or OS involvement; hardware associates memory 
requests with those descriptors and uses that information to make 
informed decisions at the memory controller. InterStellar 2.0 then 
extends this interface and the controller mechanisms to (i) operate ef
ficiently in realistic multi-channel DRAM systems, where bandwidth is 
scaled by striping batched requests across many independent channels; 
and (ii) represent fine-grained structured access patterns as separately 
managed sub-streams for better performance.
At a high level, our contributions are as follows:
• Revisiting software-informed memory control. We detail the 
InterStellar HW/SW interface, which allows the compiler to de
scribe memory streams to hardware without ISA changes, and re
view how the Nucleus and memory controller cooperate via iPP 
and iBatch to reduce row-buffer thrashing and improve effective 
bandwidth in single-channel systems.
• InterStellar 2.0 for high-bandwidth systems. We extend this 
architecture to platforms with many DRAM channels (and DDR5
style subchannels), enabling each channel to apply iPP and iBatch 
using software-supplied stream information while avoiding global 
coupling between channels. This supports scalable delivered
bandwidth with channel count in realistic many-channel config
urations.
• Finer-grained expressiveness. We generalize the notion of a 
‘‘stream’’ so that software can optionally describe multiple related 
access patterns within the same primitive data structure (for 
example, multiple structured slices of an array in stencil-like ker
nels) as distinct sub-streams. InterStellar 2.0 uses this additional 
information to maintain per-sub-stream locality state, improving 
controller decisions in complex, bandwidth-bound loops.
• Extended Experimental analysis. We evaluate InterStellar 2.0 
on an 8-core RISC-V system with DDR-class timing, sweeping 
DRAM configurations from 1 to 32 channels. Relative to a
commercial-style baseline controller, InterStellar 2.0 improves 
end-to-end performance by up to 2.92× and increases sustained 
delivered bandwidth by up to 2.83×. We also show that enabling 
only the finer-grained stream description — without changing 
channel count — improves controller decisions in structured loop 
nests, yielding up to 1.35× performance gain.
2 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews 
DRAM organization, multi-channel address interleaving, and stream 
classes. Section 3 motivates the need for per-stream control, multi
channel scalability, and finer-grained stream representation. Section 4 
describes the InterStellar 2.0 architecture, including the HW/SW in
terface, Nucleus, and controller extensions. Section 5 details the in
telligent multi-channel memory controller policies. Section 8 outlines 
our methodology, and Section 9 presents the evaluation. Related work, 
system considerations, and associated costs of the system are discussed 
in Sections Section 10, 6, and 7 respectively.
2. Background
2.1. DRAM
2.1.1. Organization and access behavior
DRAM is organized hierarchically into channels, ranks, bank groups, 
and banks. Each bank is a two-dimensional array of cells arranged as 
rows and columns. Accessing a row requires issuing an Activate (ACT)
command, which copies the selected row into a set of sense amplifiers 
that form the row buffer or DRAM page. Subsequent reads or writes to 
columns within the same open row are served directly from this buffer 
using Column Access Strobe (CAS) commands, completing with column 
latency 𝑡𝐶𝐿
 according to JEDEC timing [9]. These are row hits and incur 
the lowest latency.
If the next access targets a different row in the same bank, the 
controller must (i) close the existing row with a Precharge (PRE) com
mand, incurring 𝑡𝑅𝑃
 (row precharge delay), (ii) activate the new row, 
incurring 𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷
 (row to column delay), and (iii) issue a CAS. This row 
conflict path has approximately 𝑡𝑅𝑃 +𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷 +𝑡𝐶𝐿
 latency and dominates 
worst-case service time [9]. When a bank is idle, the first access is a
row miss, requiring only ACT and CAS and incurring 𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷+𝑡𝐶𝐿
 latency 
cycles.
Command issue is further constrained by JEDEC timing parameters: 
 
 𝑅𝑅𝐷
 (minimum interval between ACT commands to different banks), 
 
 𝐹𝐴𝑊
 (no more than four ACTs within a rolling window), 𝑡𝑅𝐴𝑆
 (mini
mum time a row must remain active before PRE), and 𝑡𝑊𝑇𝑅
 (minimum 
delay from a WR to a subsequent RD due to bus turnaround) [9]. 
DDR4 introduces bank groups, yielding shorter inter-group and longer 
intra-group delays; DDR5 increases the number of banks and bank 
groups and tightens several activate/column timings to reach higher 
data rates [10]. Consequently, effective inter-request latency depends 
on whether consecutive requests are row hits or row conflicts and on 
whether they target banks in the same or in different bank groups.
2.1.2. Page policies
The memory controller determines when to keep a row open and 
when to precharge it, directly affecting the average latency:
• Open-page policy. Leaves a row open after service, exploiting lo
cality but performing poorly when streams switch rows frequently 
due to repeated 𝑡𝑅𝑃 +𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷
 penalties.
• Closed-page policy. Precharges immediately after each access, 
bounding worst-case latency but eliminating row reuse.
• Adaptive (COTS) policy. Implements a per-bank heuristic that 
predicts whether to leave a row open or close it based on re
cent hit/miss patterns [42–47]. These reactive, hardware-only 
schemes cannot distinguish which loop or kernel issued each 
access and thus ignore program-level intent.
Quality of Service (QoS) vs. access intent. Many controllers also 
support QoS/priority signals (e.g., requestor IDs or criticality classes) 
to arbitrate among requesters; however, such signals do not encode
program access intent or near-future row locality (i.e., which stream 
is likely to generate row hits next). InterStellar 2.0 is orthogonal: it 
supplies stream/sub-stream identity and predicted locality to steer page 
policy and deterministic batching, and can be composed with QoS
aware arbitration, which allows the controller to manage row buffers 
per stream or sub-stream rather than per bank. This design reduces 
avoidable row conflicts and preserves row hits, improving both latency 
and bandwidth efficiency.
2.2. Multi-channel DRAM systems
High-performance systems employ multiple independent DRAM 
channels to increase aggregate bandwidth. Each channel operates under 
its own controller and timing constraints, allowing parallel issue of
ACT, PRE, and CAS commands. DDR4 scales bandwidth by adding 
more channels or ranks per channel, while DDR5 enhances throughput 
through higher data rates, more banks and bank groups, and dual 
subchannels per DIMM [9,10]. A DRAM channel is typically an inde
pendently scheduled command/address and data interface managed 
by a controller. DDR5 subchannels partition a DIMM channel into two 
(logically) independent 32-bit command/data domains to increase par
allelism and reduce access granularity. In InterStellar 2.0, segmented 
batching targets the abstraction of an independently scheduled command 
domain: the Nucleus generates per-domain batch seeds and each do
main maintains its own iPP/iBatch state (thus the same mechanism 
applies whether the domains are channels or DDR5 subchannels).
Physical address mappings exploit this parallelism by interleav
ing consecutive cache-line addresses across channels and, within each 
channel, across banks or bank groups. Interleaving balances utiliza
tion but introduces a coordination challenge: a single logical soft
ware stream may map to multiple hardware channels. Global batching 
across such channels would require inter-controller communication and 
complex arbitration.
InterStellar 2.0 resolves this by partitioning each stream’s future ac
cesses among channels before scheduling. Each channel then performs 
batching and page management locally, with no shared batch state 
or cross-channel communication. This enables near-linear bandwidth 
scaling with channel count while maintaining controller independence 
and compatibility with DDR4/DDR5 organizations, including DDR5 
subchannelization.
2.3. Streams and memory access regularity
A stream is a predictable sequence of memory accesses described 
by a compact set of parameters [18]. Streams appear naturally in 
dense linear algebra, stencil computations, tensor operations, struc
tured reductions, and analytics kernels [48]. Two main classes are 
relevant:
Direct streams. Defined by a base address, fixed stride, and iter
ation count, direct streams produce spatially sequential or regularly 
strided accesses with high row-buffer locality. Because the pattern 
is statically known, the controller can determine future cache-line 
requests and decide when to keep rows open or batch lines. Such pat
terns dominate vectorized numerical workloads (e.g., BLAS/LAPACK 
routines), stencil sweeps, and tensor traversals [17,48].
Indirect streams. Indirect streams compute addresses through one 
or more levels of indirection, such as A[B[i]] or A[B[C[i]]], com
mon in sparse linear algebra, graph analytics, irregular gathers/scat
ters, and certain machine-learning kernels [18,49–52]. Although their 
locality is less regular, repeated access to a limited subset of addresses 
still provides exploitable reuse.
Prior work (InterStellar) conveyed program-visible stream descrip
tors to hardware so the controller could (i) group upcoming accesses 
from direct streams proactively and (ii) apply page-management de
cisions using per-stream locality metrics rather than per-bank heuris
tics. This substantially reduced row conflicts and improved effective 
bandwidth without requiring ISA extensions or application changes.
3 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
3. Motivation
Modern multicore performance is still bounded by main-memory 
service, not core microarchitecture. Even with wide out-of-order cores, 
large miss status holding registers (MSHRs) capacity, and strong
prefetching, systems remain limited by (i) latency inflation from row 
conflicts and bank/bank-group timing, and (ii) delivered-bandwidth 
limits when traffic concentrates on too few channels. These constraints 
persist from DDR4 to DDR5, despite DDR5’s higher data rate, additional 
banks/bank-groups, and dual sub-channels [9,10]. InterStellar demon
strated that exporting software-visible stream metadata (e.g., base, 
stride, loop context) to the memory controller enables per-stream 
batching and per-stream row-buffer decisions without ISA changes, re
ducing conflicts and improving effective bandwidth under contention. 
Two gaps remain for realistic platforms: support for multi-channel 
organization and for multiple logically distinct access slices within 
complex loops.
3.1. Limits of conventional prefetching and page policies
Conventional prefetching and page policies are largely reactive: 
prefetchers inject predicted requests into the hierarchy, while COTS 
controllers apply adaptive page policies to keep/close rows per access. 
In practice, several structural limits these mechanisms from optimizing 
the performance:
• Back-pressure and queue limits. Prefetches contend with de
mand traffic for MSHRs, LLC-miss tracking, NoC bandwidth, 
and MC read-queue slots. When these structures saturate, extra 
prefetches either stall or amplify upstream interference, capping 
effective parallelism even if DRAM banks remain available.
• Uncoordinated DRAM access. When independent streams in
terleave, the controller alternates across rows/banks, increas
ing textttACT/PRE conflicts instead of issuing long runs of row 
hits. This is exacerbated in multicore and large-stride streaming, 
where each stream has internal regularity that is destroyed by 
interleaving.
• Pollution and wasted bandwidth. Speculative lines can evict 
useful data and consume bandwidth without being used, increas
ing latency and reducing throughput, especially for high-stride or 
irregular patterns.
• Bank-level, not stream-level, policy. COTS page policies track 
locality per bank, not per stream. Without knowing which stream 
generated an access, the controller may close a row that the same 
stream will reuse soon, or keep a row open when the next access 
is predictably a conflict.
InterStellar mitigated these limits in the single-channel setting by 
moving stream-aware control into the memory controller: it batches 
predictable row-hit accesses per stream, buffers returned lines locally, 
and applies page policy per stream rather than per bank. This reduces 
speculative prefetch flooding and lets the controller schedule for DRAM 
timing rather than arrival order. However, scaling challenges remain 
and motivate InterStellar 2.0.
3.2. Motivation: Multi-channel scaling
High-performance systems use multiple independent DRAM chan
nels (and DDR5 subchannels) to raise aggregate bandwidth [9,10]. Be
cause address mapping interleaves cache lines across channels, a single 
logical stream is typically striped across controllers. This same abstrac
tion appears in stacked-memory systems such as HBM, which expose 
many independently scheduled command domains (channels/pseudo
channels) to provide high aggregate bandwidth. InterStellar 2.0 targets 
any such independently scheduled domain: the Nucleus emits per
domain batch seeds, and each domain maintains its own iPP/iBatch 
Fig. 1. daxpy kernel C code and its stream-flow graph.
state and buffers. A naive multi-channel extension of InterStellar would 
require a global batch structure spanning channels, inter-channel co
ordination for request ownership/ordering, and shared backpressure 
when any channel stalls. This introduces a cross-controller dependency 
path (harder timing closure) and can throttle aggregate bandwidth to 
the most backpressured channel, undermining channel scaling.
We therefore want per-channel autonomy: each DRAM channel 
should receive only the subset of a stream’s future accesses that map 
to that channel and should be able to batch, schedule, and manage 
page policy locally, with no cross-channel communication (mechanism 
is detailed in Section 4.4).
InterStellar 2.0 adopts exactly this model. The hardware partitions 
each stream’s predictable future addresses into per-channel segments
and forwards only the local segment to the corresponding memory con
troller. Each channel then independently performs: (i) batched issuance 
of likely row hits, (ii) local buffering of those prefetched lines, and (iii) 
per-bank row management. Because there is no shared global batch 
queue, each channel remains self-contained and can scale delivered 
bandwidth with increasing channel count.
This requirement is critical for multi-channel DDR4 and DDR5 based 
systems, where high data rates, multiple bank groups, and per-channel 
controllers are the norm. It is also essential for future many-channel 
system-on-chips that demand bandwidth scaling without adding global 
arbitration structures.
3.3. Illustrative example: Batching and multi-channel segmentation
To make the need for InterStellar 2.0 concrete, we revisit a simple 
two-stream kernel, daxpy, shown in Fig.  1. The kernel issues two direct 
streams, A and B, that access different arrays with predictable stride. 
Even though each stream individually has strong row locality, the two 
streams interfere when their requests reach DRAM close in time.
Fig.  2 compares four cases: (a) a baseline open-page controller 
on a single channel, (b) the same baseline controller on two channels 
under a RoBaBgColRaCh mapping (row → bank → bank-group →
column → rank → channel), (c) InterStellar (which only supports 
single channel) applying intelligent page policy (iPP) and deterministic 
batching (iBatch), and (d) InterStellar 2.0 applying the same policies 
on two channels with channel-aware segmentation. For clarity, timing 
values are representative of DDR4/DDR5- devices: a row hit is modeled 
as 5 cycles, a row miss (open on an idle bank) as 20 cycles, and a row 
conflict (precharge old row + activate new row + serve column) as 40 
cycles, consistent with the order of magnitude of 𝑡𝐶𝐿, 𝑡𝑅𝐶𝐷, and 𝑡𝑅𝑃
 in 
JEDEC DRAM timing [9,10].
We report two quantities: (i) end-to-end (E2E) latency, mea
sured from the first request arrival to the last request completion 
on the critical path seen by the core; and (ii) active DRAM cycles, 
i.e., the cumulative busy service time spent by the controller(s) issuing 
ACT/PRE/CAS to DRAM. Active DRAM cycles capture how hard the 
memory system had to work to serve the same logical sequence of 
requests; reducing this value indicates higher efficiency, fewer row 
conflicts, and lower energy per unit of delivered data.
4 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
(1) E2E latency: 250 cycles.
(a) Baseline open-page policy on single channel.
(b) Baseline open-page policy on two channels.
(c) InterStellar applying iPP+iBatch on single channel.
(d) InterStellar 2.0 applying iPP+iBatch on two channels.
(e) 
Fig. 2. Two streams from daxpy BM: baseline DRAM latency vs. iPP+iBatch
policy.
Baseline, single channel. Fig.  2(a) shows two streams (A, B) targeting 
the same channel. Because requests from A and B arrive interleaved, 
the open-page controller alternates rows: every new arrival forces a 
row conflict in the same bank. The controller repeatedly precharges 
and re-activates different rows instead of issuing long runs of row hits. 
The result is as following:
(1) E2E latency: 320 cycles.
(2) Active DRAM cycles: 5+7×40 = 285 cycles.
Baseline, two channels. Fig.  2(b) shows the same open-page policy, but 
now the physical address mapping interleaves consecutive cache lines 
across two channels (Channel0 and Channel1) using RoBaBgCol
RaCh. Because the two channels can operate in parallel, some service 
time overlaps. We observe:
(1) E2E latency: 290 cycles.
(2) Active DRAM cycles: each channel still pays repeated 40-cycle 
conflict penalties, but now in parallel. Summing both channels’ work 
and subtracting the overlap gives 2 × (5 + 3 × 40) − 20 = 2×125−20 =
230 cycles.
Thus active time drops by ∼20% versus the single-channel baseline 
(285 cycles), driven by parallelism rather than improved row reuse.
Interstellar (single channel). Fig.  2(c) shows InterStellar’s iPP+iBatch 
on one channel. Two mechanisms are active: (i) iBatch issues a burst 
of predicted row-hit requests for a stream after that row is opened and 
buffers the returned data at the memory controller; and (ii) iPP explic
itly closes a row with auto-precharge when the controller determines 
that useful row hits for that stream are exhausted, so the next stream’s 
first access to a new row is a row miss (20 cycles) instead of a row
conflict (40 cycles). Observed behavior:
(2) Active DRAM cycles: 5×4+20+5×3 = 55 cycles.
Interstellar 2.0 (two channels). Fig.  2(d) applies the same concepts in 
a two-channel setting with channel-aware segmentation. Rather than 
constructing one global batch spanning both channels, InterStellar 2.0 
partitions the future access stream into per-channel segments and sends 
each segment only to its corresponding channel. Each channel then (1) 
forms its own batch, (2) issues its own run of row hits, and (3) applies 
its own page-close decisions. The outcome is:
(1) E2E latency: 250 cycles.
(2) Active DRAM cycles: with two independent channels executing 
segmented batches in parallel, (2 × 5) + 20 + 5 = 35 cycles, which is a 
∼37% reduction versus the 55-cycle active time in the single-channel 
InterStellar case.
This example highlights three properties that motivate InterStellar 
2.0:
1. Batching and page control eliminate conflict latency. Issuing 
bursts of row hits per stream and explicitly closing the row when 
it ceases to be useful removes nearly all 40-cycle conflicts (285 
→ 55 active cycles).
2. Channel parallelism alone is insufficient. Moving from one to 
two channels in a conventional controller reduces active DRAM 
time primarily via overlap (285 → 230 cycles) with modest E2E 
improvement (320 → 290 cycles).
3. Channel-aware segmented batching scales efficiency. Com
bining iPP+iBatch with per-channel segmentation cuts active 
time further (55 → 35 cycles) without any cross-channel arbi
tration. The benefit grows with batch size: longer per-stream 
row-hit bursts amplify per-channel efficiency.
So, the two new design goals of InterStellar 2.0 are necessary: (i) 
per-channel segmented execution so that bandwidth scales with chan
nel count under realistic address mappings such as RoBaBgColRaCh, 
and (ii) controller-managed batching and page policy (iPP+iBatch) so 
that predictable streams are served predominantly as row hits rather 
than as a sequence of row conflicts.
3.4. Motivation: Fine-grained sub-stream tracking
A second limitation arises in complex loops (stencils, tensor sweeps, 
multi-D grids) that touch multiple logically distinct slices of an array 
per iteration (e.g., 𝑖−1, 𝑖, 𝑖+1 in Jacobi). Treating these as one coarse 
stream pollutes locality signals: histories for different slices merge, 
short reuse is masked by long jumps, and page decisions become 
incorrect, increasing conflicts. The controller should instead track these 
slices as independent sub-streams.
InterStellar 2.0 enables the compiler to emit multiple sub-stream 
descriptors in place of a single coarse stream. The controller then 
maintains row-hit/conflict state per sub-stream, preventing cross-slice 
interference and improving page decisions under DDR4/DDR5 timing. 
Overall, InterStellar 2.0 is motivated by two needs: (1) per-stream 
batching/page control that scales across many channels without cross
channel coordination, and (2) sub-stream granularity so distinct access 
slices do not corrupt locality signals. Together, these extensions re
duce conflict-driven latency and improve delivered bandwidth under 
realistic multi-channel interleaving.
4. InterStellar 2.0 architecture
The overall InterStellar 2.0 microarchitecture is illustrated in Fig. 
3. InterStellar 2.0 generalizes InterStellar to support multi-channel
DRAM systems, introduces mechanisms for segmented batching, and in
tegrates fine-grained stream descriptors and mapping-aware scheduling 
policies to improve scalability and efficiency.
5 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 3. InterStellar 2.0 block diagram.
InterStellar 2.0 comprises three components: (1) a HW/SW inter
face that transfers loop/stream metadata from the compiler, (2) the 
LLC-resident Nucleus that interprets the descriptors and adds runtime 
context, and (3) MC extensions that enforce stream-aware batching 
and page/scheduling policies. Relative to InterStellar, the interface 
supports fine-grained sub-streams, the Nucleus performs address-based 
multi-channel segmentation, and each MC applies localized batching, 
per-channel buffering, and mapping-aware scheduling. Together, these 
changes preserve metadata-driven control while scaling across many 
channels.
4.1. HW/SW interface
InterStellar 2.0 preserves InterStellar’s interface goal: conveying 
compiler-generated metadata to hardware without ISA or OS changes. 
On RISC-V, descriptors are written via CSRs (using csrrw); the CSR 
address space provides sufficient room for custom metadata in typical 
deployments [53]. If spare CSRs are unavailable, the same descrip
tors can be exposed through a reserved memory-mapped region that 
hardware reads directly.
Stream taxonomy and descriptors. Stream taxonomy and de
scriptors. The compiler extracts loop-embedded memory streams and 
classifies them as direct (affine) or indirect (index-based). To represent 
loop structure and parameterization, InterStellar 2.0 uses four descrip
tor types: Loop, Direct Stream, Indirect Stream, and Link Variable. 
All share a common header (type, enable, and control flags). Fig.  4 
summarizes their formats.
Loop Descriptor. The Loop Descriptor specifies a loop’s iteration space 
using Start, End, and Step. To support runtime-dependent bounds, it 
can link either boundary to a Link Variable Descriptor: if the start (end) 
expression depends on another variable, the SL (EL) bit is set and the 
corresponding Start (End) field stores the linked variable’s descriptor 
ID instead of a constant. For nested loops, Parent Loop ID encodes the 
loop hierarchy, allowing hardware to reconstruct multi-level iteration 
structure without parsing source code.
Direct Stream Descriptor. The Direct Stream Descriptor captures 
an affine (stride-based) access stream. It references its enclosing loop 
via Loop ID and defines addresses using Base Address (BA) and Stride
(bytes between consecutive accesses), where the effective stride reflects 
both loop stepping and element size. If the base pointer is runtime
dependent, the BL bit is set and the BA field stores the ID of a Link 
Variable Descriptor that provides the current base value, preserving 
static stride predictability while allowing dynamic base updates.
Indirect Stream Descriptor. The Indirect Stream Descriptor repre
sents data-dependent (non-affine) streams produced by an index array. 
Fig. 4. Descriptors formats. InterStellar 2.0 formats remain compatible with 
InterStellar; fine-grained stencil streams are represented as multiple Direct 
Stream descriptors without changing the format.
It includes the index-array Base Address, the accessed data Element 
Size, and Stream Size (total number of indexed elements), enabling 
the controller to size grouping/batching windows even when addresses 
are not sequential. As with direct streams, BL indicates a runtime
dependent base, in which case the base field stores a linked-variable 
descriptor ID.
Link Variable Descriptor. Link descriptors supply runtime values 
referenced by other descriptors (e.g., bounds or base pointers) via
Register ID and Size. They eliminate extra control flow for parame
ter updates, and can be chained to express multi-level dependencies 
compactly.
Multi-threading. The Shared (S) bit marks streams shared across 
cores/threads. Although not used by the current batching path, it 
preserves forward compatibility for cache coherence.
4.2. Fine-grained stream identification
A key enhancement introduced in InterStellar 2.0 is the ability 
to identify and represent fine-grained sub-streams within multi
dimensional or irregular access patterns. Traditional stream analysis 
treats each array reference as a single stream tied to its enclosing 
loop; however, in many scientific and machine-learning workloads—
such as stencil computations (Jacobi-2D, FDTD-2D, Heat-3D)—different 
loop iterations access multiple non-contiguous rows, planes, or tiles 
6 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
concurrently. For example, a 2D stencil may read alternating even 
and odd rows (as illustrated in Fig.  5), producing two interleaved 
but independent access paths. If modeled as a single coarse-grained 
stream, such access behavior pollutes per-stream counters and confuses 
the memory controller’s page and batching policies. To address this, 
InterStellar 2.0 allows the compiler to generate multiple sub-stream 
descriptors for each array reference, one per logically independent 
access pattern. Each sub-stream descriptor inherits its loop linkage and 
base/stride information but operates with independent row-hit and 
conflict counters in hardware. This fine-grained representation ensures 
that each sub-stream maintains precise locality statistics, leading to 
higher DRAM row-hit rates and more accurate page-closing decisions.
4.2.1. Motivating example: Jacobi–2D
Consider the jacobi-2d kernel from PolyBench, which applies a 
5-point stencil update on two arrays, A and B, over multiple time steps:
for (t = 0; t < T; t++) {
  // Stencil applied to A:
  for (i = 1; i < N-1; i += S)
    for (j = 1; j < M-1; j++)
      B[i][j] = 0.2 * (A[i][j] + A[i][j-1] + A[i][j+1]
                                 + A[i-1][j] + A[i+1][j]);
  // Stencil applied to B:
  for (i = 1; i < N-1; i += S)
    for (j = 1; j < M-1; j++)
      A[i][j] = 0.2 * (B[i][j] + B[i][j-1] + B[i][j+1]
                                 + B[i-1][j] + B[i+1][j]);
}
For jacobi-2d, each update reads a 5-point neighborhood. With 
 
 =1, adjacent iterations overlap in the 𝑖 dimension, so most accesses 
hit rows already resident in cache/row buffers; a single coarse descrip
tor per array is typically sufficient. When 𝑆>1 (e.g., 𝑆=3), stencil 
windows become non-overlapping: each iteration touches three distinct 
rows with delayed reuse. A single descriptor then mixes independent 
rows, polluting hit/conflict statistics; iPP can mispredict usefulness 
and trigger premature precharges, reducing row-hit rate and effective 
bandwidth.
4.2.2. Fine-grained sub-stream construction
To address this, InterStellar 2.0 decomposes such coarse-grained 
streams into multiple fine-grained sub-streams, each corresponding to 
one logically independent access path (e.g., one row or plane in a 
stencil window). For the stencil applied to array A at a given iteration 
 
 , the computation traverses three rows:
𝙰[𝑖−1,∗], 𝙰[𝑖,∗], 𝙰[𝑖+1,∗].
The compiler therefore generates three direct sub-stream descrip
tors:
A1∶BA=&𝙰[𝑖−1][0], A2∶BA=&𝙰[𝑖][0],
A3∶BA=&𝙰[𝑖+1][0],
where & stands for the address of the specified memory location, and 
each with size =𝑀 elements and stride = sizeof(element). Similarly, 
for the stencil applied to B, the compiler emits three sub-streams B1, 
B2, and B3. All sub-streams share the same enclosing loop descriptor 
but maintain independent row-hit and conflict counters in hardware. 
At the start of each outer-loop iteration, the compiler overwrites the 
base addresses via a few CSR writes to advance the stencil window 
by 𝑆 rows. This results in three steady, independent direct streams 
per array, eliminating counter interference and improving row-buffer 
predictability.
(a) Coarse-grained stream. A single descriptor mixes accesses from 
multiple rows.
(b) Fine-grained sub-streams. The compiler emits separate sub-streams 
(𝐴1, 𝐴2, 𝐴3) corresponding to rows 𝑖−1, 𝑖, and 𝑖+1.
Fig. 5. Coarse-grained vs. fine-grained stream decomposition for the
Jacobi-2D stencil with stride 𝑆=3. (a) A single coarse stream interleaves 
accesses from multiple rows. (b) Fine-grained sub-streams isolate each row’s 
access sequence.
Effect on iPP and iBatch. Fine-grained sub-streams primarily ben
efit iPP: independent hit/conflict tracking yields more accurate open/
close decisions and avoids premature precharges. iBatch benefits less 
directly because it already groups row-hit requests by row; fine-grained 
streams mainly help by reducing conflict-induced disruptions that 
would otherwise break batching opportunities.
Software Overhead and Compatibility. The software overhead 
introduced by fine-grained streaming is negligible. Only a small num
ber of CSR updates are required at the beginning of each outer-loop 
iteration—six writes in the Jacobi-2D case (three for A, three for B). 
Because the sub-stream descriptors reuse the same descriptor format 
(Fig.  4), no ISA extensions or format changes are needed. This ap
proach therefore preserves full backward compatibility with InterStel
lar while improving memory-system efficiency for multi-dimensional 
stencil workloads.
Compiler integration. The Low Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) 
analysis should be extended to detect fine-grained sub-streams by 
grouping array references whose index expressions are independent 
affine functions of loop iterators (e.g., 𝐴[𝑖−1][𝑗] vs. 𝐴[𝑖][𝑗]). Each 
group becomes a separate direct-stream descriptor, emitted statically 
into CSR initialization code. Since InterStellar 2.0 reuses InterStellar’s 
descriptor formats and CSR mechanism, the interface is unchanged; 
only the compiler emits richer metadata.
Since InterStellar 2.0 reuses the same descriptor structures and CSR 
access mechanisms as InterStellar, no hardware or software interface 
change is required—only the compiler emits a richer set of descriptors.
Through compiler-guided fine-grained stream extraction and de
scriptor generation, InterStellar 2.0 enhances the expressiveness of 
the HW/SW interface without changing the underlying ISA, enabling 
hardware to distinguish and optimize for multiple sub-streams that 
arise naturally in modern compute kernels.
4.3. Nucleus: Central engine of InterStellar 2.0
The nucleus forms the central intelligence of InterStellar 2.0, bridg
ing compiler-supplied metadata with runtime hardware behavior. Po
sitioned alongside the last-level cache (LLC), it interprets stream de
scriptors, enriches them with dynamic information, and guides down
stream components—such as the memory controllers—to take software
informed scheduling decisions. The nucleus extends the baseline In
terStellar design with broader functionality, including multi-channel 
segmentation and mapping-aware coordination.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
7 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
4.3.1. Baseline nucleus operation
At initialization, the nucleus reads descriptors written into CSRs and 
derives loop/stream properties. For loop descriptor 𝑖, it computes the 
iteration count from Start (𝑆), End (𝐸), and Step (𝐼): 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝_𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖 =
𝐸𝑖−𝑆𝑖
𝐼𝑖
. For nested loops, it composes iteration counts across levels to 
reconstruct the program’s multi-level iteration space. For each stream, 
the nucleus computes the accessed VA interval. For direct stream 𝑖: 
 
 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 + 𝑆𝐿𝑜𝑜𝑝𝐼𝐷[𝑖] ⋅ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑖,
𝑒𝑛𝑑_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 +𝐸𝐿𝑜𝑜𝑝𝐼𝐷[𝑖] ⋅ 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑖.
For indirect streams: 
 
 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑉 𝐴𝑖, 𝑒𝑛𝑑_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒_𝑉 𝐴𝑖 +𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖.
(1)
(2)
(3)
These ranges help disambiguate streams even when they share pages. 
The nucleus stores descriptor fields and derived attributes in the Desc 
Table (e.g., Did, Cid, Tid, DType).
On each LLC miss, the LLC Request Filter checks (in parallel) 
whether the address falls within any active stream range in the Desc 
Table. Matching misses are tagged by the LLC Packet Appender
with stream/core/thread metadata, enabling software-aware schedul
ing and page policies at the MC. Fig.  6 shows descriptor initializa
tion, where the Desc Table stores stream information and direct
stream VA ranges: stream A spans 0x3000–0x3FF8 and stream B spans 
0x5000–0x5FF8. For LLC misses at 0xB200 and 0x1700, the LLC Re
quest Filter maps 0xB200 to VA=0x3200 in stream A, marks 0x1700 
as non-stream, appends metadata, and forwards both packets to the 
memory controller.
4.3.2. Nucleus considerations
Address-domain translation. Descriptors are specified in VA
space, while LLC misses are in PA space. To bridge this without OS 
changes, the nucleus uses an Inverse Stream Translation Lookaside 
Buffer (Stream TLB−1). that caches recent (𝑉 𝐴,𝑃𝐴) pairs for active 
streams. On a miss, the Desc Table identifies the stream and installs 
the translation. Sequential streaming keeps the required working set 
small [54].
Latency Considerations. The nucleus avoids extending the LLC 
critical path by overlapping filtering with LLC tag lookup. The check 
completes in two cycles (one TLB−1 access, one Desc Table lookup). 
Because requests carry a descriptor ID, descriptor metadata access is 
a direct indexed lookup (O(1)); moreover, the Desc Table query is 
overlapped with LLC tag lookup, so it does not become a throughput 
bottleneck on the critical path. Given that LLC hit/miss determination 
usually takes more than two cycles, this overlap fully hides nucleus 
latency. The LLC Packet Appender operates combinationally, adding 
minimal wire-level delay.
Communication Efficiency. To minimize interconnect traffic, only 
compact metadata is forwarded to the memory controller: descriptor 
ID, core ID, thread ID, and descriptor type. The stride of a direct stream, 
being static, is transmitted once during stream initialization. Modern 
SoC fabrics such as ARM AXI provide user-defined bit fields, making 
this extension compatible with existing interconnect standards.
4.4. Multi-channel aware Nucleus extension
Multi-channel DRAM increases bandwidth, but it breaks single
channel batching: consecutive stream accesses are interleaved across 
channels, so a global batch would require inter-channel synchroniza
tion and can reduce concurrency. InterStellar 2.0 instead integrates 
a multi-channel segmentation mechanism in the nucleus: it computes 
the per-channel segment starts, then each memory controller locally 
expands and manages only its own segment.
Address Mapping for Multi-Channel DRAM. We adopt a Row/
BNK/BG/CH/column partitioning (Fig.  7) that interleaves consecutive 
(a) Descriptors.
(b) Descriptor Table.
(c) LLC request filter and appender.
Fig. 6. Illustrative example of nucleus operation: descriptors populate the
Desc Table; incoming LLC misses are checked by the LLC Request Filter, 
and matching requests are annotated with stream metadata before being 
dispatched.
Fig. 7. Deployed address mapping for Multi-Channel (M-Ch) to interleave 
consecutive accesses across different channels.
cache lines across channels to improve bandwidth utilization while 
preserving row locality within each channel. This mapping interleaves 
consecutive cache-line addresses across channels, improving bandwidth 
utilization while retaining row locality within each DRAM.
Channel-Aware iBatch-Seed Dispatcher. As depicted in Fig.  8, 
when the nucleus identifies a direct stream, it initiates the intelligent 
batch (iBatch) and computes the corresponding channel assignments 
using the address mapping. Channel-Aware iBatch-Seed Dispatcher gen
erates Only the first request within each iBatch segment; each memory 
controller (MCi) subsequently expands and manages its own batch 
segment locally. This approach avoids inter-channel communication 
while preserving global software awareness, enabling fully parallel 
batching across channels.
Illustrative example. In Fig.  9, requests 𝑅0–𝑅15
 from a stream are 
interleaved across four channels (CH0–CH3). With stride = 1 and batch 
size 𝐵 = 16, the nucleus seeds one segment per channel (e.g., 𝑅0–𝑅3), 
and each MCi
 expands its local subset (e.g., MC0
 handles 𝑅4,𝑅8,𝑅12). 
With two cache lines stride, only channels 1 and 3 receive requests, 
resulting in segmentation without cross-MC coordination.
8 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 8. Multi-Channel–aware InterStellar 2.0’s Nucleus architecture exten
sion. The nucleus identifies direct streams and issues distributed iBatch
requests across channels, allowing each MCi
 to manage its own batch segment 
independently.
Fig. 9. Example of interleaved multi-channel access. With a stride of two 
cache lines, requests map to channels 1 and 3 (highlighted), showcasing 
dynamic per-channel segmentation.
5. Use case: Intelligent multi-channel MC
The MC orchestrates off-chip DRAM by scheduling commands, en
forcing timing, and managing row-buffer residency (hits vs. conflicts) to 
minimize service time. In InterStellar and InterStellar 2.0, this role is 
augmented with software stream metadata: the Nucleus tags each LLC 
miss with its thread/stream identity and whether the stream is direct 
(affine stride) or indirect (index-driven).
This metadata enables two capabilities unavailable to conventional 
controllers: (i) stream-aware row residency driven by deterministic 
locality (rather than bank-only heuristics), and (ii) proactive fetch of 
predictable future row-hit lines while the row is already open. These 
are implemented by two coordinated units: iPP and iBatch.
In InterStellar 2.0, both units are extended beyond the single
channel baseline to operate over fine-grained sub-streams, to scale 
across multiple DRAM channels without inter-channel synchronization, 
and to tolerate deeper batches without stalling the controller datapath.
(1) Intelligent Page Policy (iPP). iPP controls row residency per 
bank, keeping rows open while a (sub-)stream is producing hits and 
precharging when conflicts dominate. InterStellar 2.0 extends iPP with 
fine-grained sub-stream tracking and fully local per-channel execution 
so each channel’s banks decide autonomously.
(2) Intelligent Batching (iBatch). iBatch reduces effective latency 
by issuing reads for predictable future row-hit lines ahead of demand 
and staging them in a per-bank iBuffer. InterStellar 2.0 adds sub-stream 
awareness, channel-aware segmented batching, and a PAQ to absorb 
overflow when batch depth exceeds immediate buffer/timing capacity. 
The rest of this section describes iPP and iBatch in detail.
5.1. Intelligent page policy (iPP) management unit
iPP manages row-buffer residency per bank: it keeps a row open 
to harvest locality and precharges to avoid repeated conflicts. Con
ventional controllers rely on bank-level open/close heuristics with no 
visibility into which loop/kernel produced each access. In InterStellar 
and InterStellar 2.0, every request carries a (sub-)stream ID, and iPP 
maintains locality state per (sub-)stream, making row open/close deci
sions specialized to each stream’s behavior. InterStellar 2.0 strengthens 
iPP by (1) tracking fine-grained sub-streams independently to avoid 
cross-slice pollution and (2) executing locally per bank/per channel so 
row decisions require no cross-channel coordination.
iPP is implemented using two complementary policies: one for 
direct streams and one for indirect streams. Both operate at per-bank 
scope.
5.1.1. Direct-stream row-hit counters
For a direct (affine) stream, once a row is activated the next cache 
lines within that row are predictable. The goal is to keep the row open 
while those hits remain and precharge just before the stream transitions 
to a different row (to avoid a conflict). iPP maintains a per-bank row-hit 
counter for each active direct sub-stream and estimates how many hits 
are available in the currently open row: 
MaxHitstream𝑖 
=
DRAM Page Size
max(Cache Line Size,𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒(stream𝑖)) .
(4)
Here, 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒(stream𝑖) is the byte stride carried in the stream’s Direct 
Stream Descriptor. The denominator takes the maximum of the cache 
line size and the stream’s stride to conservatively approximate how 
quickly that sub-stream will advance across lines and eventually into 
a different DRAM row. Each row hit for sub-stream 𝑖 increments its 
counter. When the counter reaches MaxHitstream𝑖
, iPP precharges the 
bank and resets the counter, keeping the row open long enough to 
harvest hits, but closing it before the stream transitions to a new row 
and begins generating conflicts.
InterStellar 2.0 instantiates row-hit counters per fine-grained sub
stream in each bank and channel. For stencil codes, neighbors such as 
 
 [𝑖−1,∗], 𝐴[𝑖,∗], and 𝐴[𝑖+1,∗] track locality independently, preventing 
one slice from prematurely closing a row needed by another and 
keeping decisions local to each channel.
5.1.2. Indirect-stream conflict tracking windows
Indirect streams are index-driven, so the controller cannot analyt
ically predict remaining row hits after an ACT. iPP therefore applies 
a per-bank runtime classifier: for each active indirect stream it tracks 
recent row addresses and accumulates conflicts in a sliding window, 
then compares the conflict count against two programmable thresholds 
to decide whether to keep the row open or precharge. Per bank, iPP 
maintains for each indirect stream a small conflict window: previ
ous/current row addresses, a conflict counter, and a short hit/conflict 
history. On every access to that bank: - If Crnt Addr is the same row as
Prev Addr, iPP treats this as a row hit and leaves the conflict counter 
unchanged. - If Crnt Addr refers to a different row than Prev Addr, iPP 
classifies this as a row conflict, increments the conflict counter, and 
records ‘‘conflict’’ in the sliding window.
iPP then uses a two-threshold rule to decide if the row should be 
closed:
Close Row ⇐ Conflicts > 𝑇𝐻 ∨
(
𝑇𝐿 ≤ Conflicts ≤ 𝑇𝐻 ∧ Prev Access = Conflict
)
(5)
where 𝑇𝐻
 and 𝑇𝐿
 are programmable high and low thresholds.
Intuitively, iPP closes the row when conflicts are clearly high (≥
𝑇𝐻), or when the conflict rate is borderline (𝑇𝐿–𝑇𝐻) and the most 
recent access is also a conflict; otherwise it keeps the row open to 
exploit remaining locality.
Each request is tagged with its originating (sub-)stream ID, allowing 
the controller to maintain an independent conflict-tracking window 
for every active indirect stream in each DRAM bank. This per-stream, 
per-bank organization isolates locality statistics and drives row-buffer 
residency decisions using only that stream’s observed behavior.
9 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 10.  Conflict-tracking mechanism for indirect streams. Each bank 
maintains multiple sliding windows, one per active stream and uses the two
threshold rule to decide when to precharge.
Together, the direct-stream row-hit counters and the indirect-stream 
conflict windows give the controller precise, per-stream control over 
DRAM row residency. Rows are held open only while they are produc
tive for that specific stream or sub-stream, and they are precharged as 
soon as that stream’s access pattern begins to produce conflicts. This 
increases row-buffer hit rate, reduces destructive row thrashing, and 
lowers average DRAM service time.
Fig.  10 summarizes the per-bank tracking structures used by iPP.
5.2. Intelligent batching (iBatch) management unit
iBatch proactively issues reads for deterministic future accesses to 
reduce DRAM latency and interference. For direct streams, once a row 
is activated the next row-hit cache-line addresses are known from (base, 
stride), so the MC fetches them ahead of demand and stages them in a 
per-bank iBuffer. This converts future misses/conflicts into buffer hits 
and reduces row thrashing by issuing ordered runs of row hits instead 
of interleaved accesses.
5.2.1. Baseline iBatch behavior
In the baseline InterStellar controller, opening a row for a direct 
stream triggers immediate expansion of the next few row-hit addresses 
and pre-issuance of their reads. Returned data are stored in a per-bank
iBuffer with flags {𝑊 ,𝑅} indicating an in-flight read and duplicate
suppression, respectively. A later demand either (i) hits ready data 
(𝑊 = 0) and returns immediately, (ii) hits an in-flight entry (𝑊 = 1) 
and waits for completion, or (iii) misses the iBuffer and issues a new 
DRAM read. The main knobs are iBatch depth (lookahead) and iBuffer
capacity. Figs.  13 and 14 shows the iBatch structure and its control 
flow.
5.2.2. Sub-stream awareness and per-bank execution
In InterStellar 2.0, iBatch operates per sub-stream: it uses each 
sub-stream’s (base, stride) to generate and issue its own row-hit batch, 
inserting returned lines into the bank’s shared iBuffer. Although the 
iBuffer is not partitioned by sub-stream, per-sub-stream batch triggers 
prevent independent slices from being suppressed by a coarse merged 
stream. iBatch remains strictly per-bank: each bank maintains its own 
iBuffer and batch-expansion logic. Critically, iBatch executes entirely 
per bank. Each DRAM bank maintains its own iBuffer and its own 
iBatch expansion logic, so batching is generated and consumed locally 
in that bank.
Fig. 11. Nucleus emitting the start of each iBatch segment according to the 
target channel ID.
Fig. 12. The iBatch of 16 requests sub-divided over the multiple channels, 
each channel generates sequence of addresses hits on the current channel only.
5.2.3. Channel-local batch expander
In multi-channel systems, physical-address interleaving stripes a 
single logical stream across channels, so batching must be performed 
per channel rather than as one global batch. InterStellar 2.0 addresses 
this with Channel-Local Batch Expander. When the Nucleus tags a 
request as belonging to a stream, it also determines (using the address 
mapping) which subset of that stream’s near-future row-hit addresses 
will land in each DRAM channel (Fig.  11). For each active chan
nel, the controller is given a batch segment seed: the initial address 
and stride information for that channel’s portion of the stream’s next 
batch window. For channel 𝑐, the expander locally expands only 𝑆𝐸𝐺𝑐
(Fig.  12), issues its row-hit-eligible reads, and stages returned lines 
in that channel’s per-bank iBuffers under local timing constraints. No 
cross-channel ordering, backpressure, or shared batch state is required, 
eliminating inter-controller dependencies while preserving row-local 
batching within each channel.
5.2.4. Pending ACT Queue (PAQ)
Deeper batches convert more future misses into iBuffer hits, but 
they also create bursts of outstanding reads that can exceed (i) iBuffer 
capacity and (ii) what a bank can sustain under DRAM timing limits. 
To avoid pipeline stalls under deep lookahead, InterStellar 2.0 adds 
a small per-channel/per-bank Pending ACT Queue (PAQ) that holds 
overflow batch requests as addresses only. The controller drains PAQ 
entries when iBuffer space is available and DRAM timing permits 
additional commands, decoupling logical batch depth from instanta
neous issue/buffering capacity. This enables aggressive lookahead while 
respecting timing constraints and avoiding starvation.
5.3. Coordination between iBatch and iPP
iBatch and iPP cooperate: iPP signals when a row is productive (hits 
dominate) versus thrashing (conflicts dominate), and iBatch uses this 
as a per-(sub-)stream, per-bank stop condition as following:
10 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 13. iBatch organization (per each DRAM channel’s individual banks).
Fig. 14. Operational flow of channel aware iBatch.
(1) If a direct sub-stream’s row-hit counter reaches its MaxHitstream𝑖
budget (Eq. (4)), iPP will request a precharge for that bank. iBatch 
immediately stops extending that sub-stream’s batch in that bank.
(2) If an indirect stream’s conflict-tracking window crosses the high 
threshold 𝑇𝐻
 in Eq. (5), iPP again requests a precharge, and iBatch 
halts batch expansion for that stream in that bank.
(3) As long as locality remains high and capacity (iBuffer or PAQ) 
is available, iBatch continues to populate future row-hit lines for that 
sub-stream.
Configurability and fairness. The controller exposes tunable thresholds 
for iPP (Eqs. (4), (5)) and capacity/policy knobs for iBatch (iBatch 
depth, iBuffer and PAQ sizing, and per-channel segment aggressive
ness). Because each channel maintains its own iPP state, iBuffer, 
PAQ, and expander logic, channels execute independently and in 
parallel, preserving timing isolation and avoiding head-of-line blocking 
from centralized batching. Because each channel maintains its own 
iPP state, iBuffer, PAQ, and batch expansion logic, channels can 
run independently and in parallel. This preserves timing isolation 
between channels, allows scalable multi-channel bandwidth utilization, 
and avoids head-of-line blocking that would otherwise arise from 
centralized batching.
Design-time sizing vs. online tuning. iBuffer and PAQ capacities are mi
croarchitectural storage choices and are fixed once the controller is 
implemented. In contrast, iBatch depth is a policy knob and can be 
tuned online (e.g., reduced under high buffer pressure and increased 
when banks are underutilized). In practice, iBuffer/PAQ sizing is provi
sioned for expected worst-case stream behavior (number of concurrent 
streams and stream aggressiveness); Section 9.8 provides sensitivity 
guidance for selecting practical operating points.
5.4. Deployment and scalability considerations
The Nucleus and InterStellar 2.0’s policies (iPP and iBatch) are 
deliberately decoupled.
The Nucleus sits at the LLC boundary. It interprets the com
piler descriptors, reconstructs per-stream and per-sub-stream metadata 
(e.g., base address, stride, sub-stream identity), reconciles virtual and 
physical addresses using a small inverse translation structure, and 
appends stream and locality metadata to each outgoing LLC miss. The 
MC consumes these metadata to enforce locality-aware scheduling. 
Batch work is partitioned per channel: each channel receives only its 
segment seed and executes it locally. Within a channel, each bank in
dependently runs iPP (row-hit counters/conflict windows), runs iBatch 
(iBuffer+PAQ), and issues DRAM commands under its own timing 
constraints.
This separation provides two deployment advantages:
(1) Placement flexibility. The Nucleus can be instantiated once 
downstream of a banked LLC (minimizing area) or replicated per LLC 
slice (minimizing miss latency), without requiring changes to the con
troller logic. The per-channel controllers only require the per-request 
annotations and batch segment seeds.
(2) Multi-controller scalability. In an 𝑁-channel system, one Nu
cleus instance generates 𝑁 per-channel segment seeds. Channels then 
schedule/buffer and apply iPP/iBatch independently, without cross
channel synchronization or a global batch queue, preserving bandwidth 
scaling and a simple interconnect.
6. System considerations
InterStellar 2.0 extends the baseline InterStellar design along sev
eral dimensions: fine-grained sub-stream tracking, multi-channel seg
mented batching, per-bank execution of page policy, and deeper batch 
lookahead. This section discusses practical considerations that arise 
from these extensions, and revisits some system-level issues.
6.1. Software overhead and practicality
Fine-grained sub-streams are exposed entirely in software using 
the existing descriptor interface. For stencil codes, the compiler emits 
multiple Direct Stream descriptors per array (e.g., one per row/plane 
slice) and advances the window by updating only their base addresses, 
requiring just a few CSR writes per outer iteration (e.g., six updates 
for Jacobi-2D). No ISA changes are needed, and the CSR names
pace typically provides ample space for this metadata. Because Inter
Stellar 2.0 reuses InterStellar’s descriptor format (Fig.  4), it remains 
backward-compatible.
6.2. iBuffer residency and capacity pressure
iBatch stages future row-hit lines in a per-bank iBuffer rather 
than inserting them directly into the LLC, which could otherwise evict 
unrelated lines with true temporal reuse. iBatch depth bounds this 
pressure but also limits latency hiding; InterStellar 2.0 keeps depth 
user-configurable to trade aggressiveness against interference. In prac
tice, effective depth depends primarily on streaming behavior, how 
aggressively streams generate misses and how many streams are active 
per running thread—rather than on a specific DRAM generation; Sec
tion 9.8 quantifies sensitivity across depths/PAQ under varying stream 
pressure.
6.3. PAQ sizing and backpressure
InterStellar 2.0 adds a PAQ to hold overflow batch requests when 
the desired lookahead exceeds iBuffer capacity or DRAM timing limits. 
PAQ decouples logical batch depth from instantaneous issue capacity, 
preventing the controller front end from stalling. Too-small PAQs 
reintroduce backpressure, while overly large PAQs increase storage and 
can delay fairness decisions; practical designs cap PAQ entries per (sub
)stream and/or apply age-based draining to prevent starvation. Accord
ingly, PAQ sizing is primarily driven by the burstiness/aggressiveness 
of stream arrivals and the number of concurrent streams.
11 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
6.4. Bank- and channel-level autonomy
iPP and iBatch operate at bank scope. Each bank maintains (i) 
per-direct-sub-stream row-hit counters (Eq. (4)) and (ii) per-indirect
stream conflict windows (Eq. (5)), along with its own iBuffer and PAQ 
state. Because this logic is instantiated per bank inside each channel 
controller, channels execute independently without inter-channel syn
chronization, simplifying timing closure and avoiding any shared global 
batch queue.
6.5. Address mapping and segmented batching
Multi-channel DRAM mappings typically use low-order physical bits 
to select the channel and higher-order bits (row/bank/bank-group) 
to preserve row locality within each channel. Consequently, a sin
gle logical stream is often striped across channels. InterStellar 2.0 
generates a per-channel batch segment seed for each active channel; 
each channel expands and schedules only its own segment into local 
per-bank iBuffers. Avoiding a global cross-channel batch eliminates 
cross-channel timing coordination and shared arbitration even under 
aggressive interleaving.
6.6. Tuning thresholds and fairness
Several control parameters are explicitly tunable: (i) the MaxHit
budget computed for each direct sub-stream, which determines when a 
row should be precharged after its useful hit window is consumed; (ii) 
the high and low conflict thresholds (𝑇𝐻, 𝑇𝐿) used to classify indirect 
streams as high-locality or conflict-prone in a given bank; (iii) per
bank iBatch depth and iBuffer capacity; and (iv) PAQ depth. These 
parameters can be provisioned per stream/sub-stream, per bank, or per 
channel to balance locality exploitation against fairness. For example, 
a memory-intensive thread can have its maximum batch depth capped 
(limiting how many PAQ entries it may occupy) to reduce head-of-line 
blocking for other threads mapped to the same bank.
6.7. Interaction with hardware prefetchers
The MC may receive both demand requests and speculative prefetch 
requests. Inaccurate hardware prefetchers can inject low-locality traffic 
that would otherwise not qualify for batching or page residency. If 
prefetch traffic is not distinguished from demand traffic, iBatch can 
waste iBuffer capacity on low-value lines and iPP can be biased toward 
keeping unproductive rows open. Tagging prefetch-generated requests 
allows the controller to either deprioritize them in iBatch (e.g., do not 
insert them into the PAQ or iBuffer past a depth limit) or exclude them 
from the per-stream counters that drive iPP. This prevents speculative 
traffic from distorting the learned locality signals of high-value streams.
6.8. Dynamic loop trip counts and runtime parameters
Loop bounds, strides, and base pointers may be known statically or 
may depend on runtime values (e.g., problem sizes passed as function 
arguments or dynamically computed offsets). The descriptor interface 
supports both cases: when values are static, the compiler encodes them 
directly in the Loop and Stream Descriptors; when they are dynamic, 
the compiler emits Link Variable Descriptors that point to architectural 
storage (e.g., dedicated CSR slots) holding the most recent runtime 
values. At runtime, the Nucleus resolves these links and populates the 
controller-visible metadata without requiring ISA changes. This mech
anism makes InterStellar 2.0 robust to non-constant trip counts and 
runtime-dependent strides while preserving compile-time analyzability 
of regular patterns.
6.9. Placement of the Nucleus and address translation
The Nucleus attaches stream metadata to LLC misses and must 
reconcile virtual-address descriptors with physical-address requests. 
One implementation places the Nucleus alongside the shared LLC and 
uses a small inverse translation structure (a ‘‘Stream TLB−1’’) to recover 
the virtual address associated with each physical miss. This allows a 
single Nucleus instance to serve all cores but requires maintaining 
recent (PA → VA) mappings for active streams. An alternative design is 
to place the Nucleus earlier in the pipeline, before address translation. 
In that case, the Nucleus operates purely in the virtual-address domain 
and can tag outgoing requests with stream IDs directly, eliminating the 
need for an inverse translation structure. The tradeoff is that such a de
sign typically requires one Nucleus instance per core (or per LLC slice), 
which increases replicated logic cost. Both designs remain compatible 
with standard SoC fabrics, since modern interconnects (e.g., AXI-style) 
already support user-defined sideband fields for request metadata.
7. Implementation and cost
InterStellar 2.0 introduces two classes of mechanisms: (i) software 
mechanisms that classify and describe memory streams at compile 
time and update stream descriptors at runtime, and (ii) hardware 
mechanisms inside the Nucleus and memory controller that interpret 
those descriptors and apply stream-aware page and batching policies. 
This section summarizes the required compiler support and quantifies 
the hardware overheads, including the incremental costs introduced 
by fine-grained sub-streams, multi-channel segmented batching, and 
deeper batch windows.
7.1. Compiler support
The compiler’s responsibility is to (1) identify memory streams and 
their structural relationships, (2) generate the corresponding descrip
tors, and (3) update those descriptors at runtime when loop-dependent 
parameters change. The implementation is realized as a mid-end LLVM 
pass with four main stages.
Loop selection. The pass first identifies loop nests that are likely 
to produce DRAM traffic with regular structure. Candidate loops are 
those that (i) contain memory accesses that depend on loop induction 
variables (directly or via simple index arithmetic), and (ii) exhibit high 
dynamic iteration counts. Profile data are used to prune loops whose 
footprint is already captured in private caches, so that descriptors are 
generated only for streams that are expected to reach DRAM.
Stream extraction and dependence analysis. For each load/store 
in a selected loop, the pass tentatively creates a stream candidate. It 
then walks backward over the data-dependence graph using a DFS to 
reconstruct the address computation. This forms a stream dependency 
tree that classifies each candidate as either: (i) a direct stream, whose 
address is affine in a loop induction variable and can be represented 
by a base address and stride, or (ii) an indirect stream, whose address 
is fetched through an index array (and may itself depend on other 
streams). Multiple streams within the same loop may share a base 
address while differing in stride or parent dependence.
Pruning. The pass prunes candidates using two criteria. First, it 
keeps only those streams whose base address and stride are loop
invariant or are computed from simple affine expressions (multipli
cation/addition by constants). Streams that require composite multi
induction-variable indexing are currently excluded. Second, it retains 
only streams that contribute meaningfully to off-chip traffic, as indi
cated by sampled DRAM access profiles mapped back to static PCs. 
When a candidate is pruned, its dependent subtree is removed.
Descriptor generation. For each surviving stream and loop, the 
pass emits four descriptor types: Loop Descriptors, Direct Stream De
scriptors, Indirect Stream Descriptors, and Link Variable Descriptors. 
These are inserted in IR as intrinsics at the loop preheader and lowered 
12 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
in the backend to CSR writes. At runtime, these CSR writes configure 
the Nucleus and MC before the loop body executes.
Fine-grained sub-streams. InterStellar 2.0 extends this flow to 
support fine-grained sub-streams for multi-dimensional kernels such as 
stencils. Instead of emitting a single coarse Direct Stream Descriptor 
for an array reference that touches multiple disjoint rows/planes per 
iteration, the pass emits multiple Direct Stream Descriptors, one per 
logically independent row/plane slice (e.g., 𝙰[𝑖 − 1,∗], 𝙰[𝑖,∗], 𝙰[𝑖 +
1, ∗]). Each sub-stream inherits the same outer loop context but is 
tracked independently in hardware. Advancing the stencil window 
across iterations requires only updating the Base Address fields of 
these descriptors. The runtime cost is a small, fixed number of CSR 
writes per outer-loop iteration (e.g., six CSR updates per timestep for 
a Jacobi 2D kernel with two arrays and three row slices per array). 
InterStellar 2.0 does not require new descriptor formats: sub-streams 
reuse the same 128-bit Direct Stream Descriptor format as InterStellar, 
preserving backward compatibility. CSR space is not a limiting factor 
because RISC-V exposes 4096 CSRs, of which only a subset are re
served by the privileged specification, leaving ample capacity for such 
metadata.
Dynamic loop parameters. Loop bounds, strides, and base point
ers may be statically known or runtime-dependent. When they are 
not compile-time constants (for example, problem size parameters or 
dynamically computed pointer bases), they are materialized into Link 
Variable Descriptors. A Link Variable Descriptor points to an architec
tural storage location (e.g., a CSR slot) that holds the live value. The 
Nucleus resolves these links at runtime and associates the concrete 
values with the corresponding loop or stream descriptor. This mecha
nism allows InterStellar 2.0 to handle dynamic trip counts and runtime 
stride/bound updates without ISA changes.
7.2. Hardware cost
The hardware cost of InterStellar 2.0 comes from three locations: 
(1) descriptor state and associated lookup logic in the Nucleus, (2) 
per-bank, per-channel tracking and buffering structures in the memory 
controller, and (3) incremental storage required to tolerate deeper 
batching in multi-channel systems. We discuss each in turn and quantify 
representative sizes based on the evaluated configuration.
7.2.1. Descriptor State and Nucleus Structures
Descriptor storage. On RV64-class systems, each CSR is 64 bits 
wide. A 128-bit descriptor therefore spans two CSRs. Profiling across 
evaluated workloads shows that 32 CSRs are sufficient to store up to 16 
active descriptors per core, supporting a mix of roughly 9 streams and 
4 loops per context. These descriptors reuse existing CSR infrastructure 
and therefore do not require new architectural state beyond allocating 
CSR indices. Although a binary may contain many descriptors, only a 
bounded subset is live at runtime (those corresponding to concurrently 
executing loops/streams). The compiler controls descriptor lifetime via 
writing descriptor to a CSR at loop entry and can reuse CSR slots when 
loops complete (Section 7.1).
Descriptor Table. At runtime, the Nucleus consolidates software 
descriptors and derived runtime metadata into a Descriptor Table. 
Each table entry records, for one stream/sub-stream: (i) static de
scriptor fields (base address/stride or index base and size), (ii) loop 
linkage information, (iii) the computed virtual-address span for that 
stream, and (iv) core/thread identifiers. In addition, a small type field 
(direct/indirect/loop/link) is stored. For 𝑆 streams across 𝐶 cores, and 
assuming ∼128 bits static state plus bookkeeping (2-bit type, ∼40 bits 
for end-of-range VA, and ID fields), total storage is on the order of
𝑆 ×𝐶×(log2𝑆 +log2𝐶 +170) bits.
For 16 streams and 8 cores, this corresponds to approximately 2.76kB.
LLC Request Filter and Packet Appender. The Nucleus monitors 
LLC misses, determines whether the miss falls within any tracked 
stream’s virtual-address span, and, on a hit, appends the corresponding 
stream/sub-stream ID and classification metadata to the request. This 
logic is dominated by comparators and narrow associative lookups into 
the Descriptor Table; it does not require large CAMs or queues. The
LLC Packet Appender is a combinational extension to the outgoing 
miss path that attaches a small metadata header (stream ID, sub-stream 
ID, stride class, bank/channel mapping).
Inverse translation structure. When the Nucleus is instantiated 
at the shared LLC and therefore sees physical addresses on LLC misses, 
it must recover the originating virtual address in order to match the 
miss to a stream whose descriptor is expressed in virtual space. This is 
implemented as a small inverse translation structure (denoted Stream 
TLB−1) that caches recently observed (PA → VA) pairs per core/thread. 
A 256-entry Stream TLB−1 is sufficient to cover active streams in the 
evaluated workloads.
Multi-channel segmentation logic. InterStellar 2.0 extends the 
Nucleus with channel-aware segmentation. For each active direct 
stream (or sub-stream), the Nucleus determines which DRAM channel 
each upcoming cache line maps to under the platform’s physical ad
dress mapping and generates a per-channel ‘‘batch segment seed’’. This 
requires computing channel/bank/row bits from the physical address 
and tagging each outgoing request with its channel-local segment ID. 
Hardware cost is minimal: the logic is a set of bit extractions plus a 
small FIFO/record per channel to hold the initial seed (e.g., the first 
address and stride for that channel’s segment). There is no need for a 
shared global batch queue across channels.
7.2.2. Memory controller extensions
The MC is extended with (i) per-bank page policy state (iPP), (ii) 
per-bank speculative data buffering (iBuffer), (iii) per-bank pending 
request staging (PAQ), and (iv) per-bank/per-channel control logic for 
segmented iBatch expansion.
iBuffer. Each DRAM bank maintains an iBuffer that holds future 
cache lines fetched speculatively by iBatch. Each iBuffer entry stores 
a 64-byte cache line and metadata (address tag, row status flags, 
stream/sub-stream ID, and two control bits 𝑊 and 𝑅 indicating ‘‘wait
ing for data’’ and ‘‘already requested’’). The metadata per entry is on 
the order of 42 bits. With 𝑅 entries per bank and 𝐵 banks per channel, 
total capacity is
𝐵×𝑅×(64 B+42 bits).
For 16 banks and 64 entries per bank, total storage is ≈69kB, which 
is ∼1.7% of a 4MB LLC. This remains the dominant SRAM structure 
introduced by the controller extension.
Per-bank iPP state. For direct sub-streams, iPP maintains a small 
saturating counter per (sub-)stream per bank to track how many row 
hits have been served from the currently open row and to compare 
that count to 𝙼𝚊𝚡𝙷𝚒𝚝stream𝑖
 (Eq. (4)). These are short (few-bit) counters 
plus a row tag. For indirect streams, iPP maintains a ‘‘conflict-tracking 
window’’ per stream per bank: a compact record of the last row 
accessed, a conflict counter, and a narrow shift register that encodes 
recent hit/conflict outcomes. In practice this is on the order of a few 
bytes per active stream. The total storage for these tables across all 
banks is negligible relative to the iBuffer and scales linearly with the 
maximum number of simultaneously tracked streams per core (tens, not 
hundreds).
PAQ (Pending ACT Queue). PAQ stores only addresses; it omits a 
request-type field because it buffers only temporarily stalled batched
RDs. Per-entry storage is therefore minimal, allowing generous pro
visioning to absorb transient overflow. Assuming 64-bit physical ad
dresses, a 4KiB PAQ can hold 512 addresses:
𝑁entries = 4 KiB
8B = 512.
Channel-Local Batch Expander logic. Each channel’s controller 
receives only its own batch segment seed from the Nucleus. Locally, 
per-bank iBatch logic walks forward through that segment using the 
13 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Table 1
Evaluation parameters.
Out of order @2.4 GHz
(One and Eight-cores)
8-wide Superscalar, 64 IQ 
32 LQ & SQ, 192 ROB entries. 
InterStellar engine
iBuffer = 4 kB/bank.
iPP Unit = 256 registers
L1-I/L1-D
L2
L3 (Shared LLC)
64 kB - 4 way - 3-cycles latency 16 MSHRs 
512 kB - 8 way - 10-cycles latency 32 MSHRs 
2MB - 16 way - 30-cycles latency 64 MSHRs 
HW prefetchers
AMPM - BOP - IMP -SlimAMPM - SPP - Stride (Stream) 
DRAM
Organization
Micron DDR4 2400 MHz, 
8GB × 8. 
DRAM addressing
DRAM scheduling
RoBaBgColRaCh 
FRFCFS Priority Hit 
sub-stream’s base address and stride, generates read commands for the 
predicted row-hit addresses, enqueues them (or places them in the PAQ 
if not yet issuable), and inserts returning data into that bank’s iBuffer. 
This logic consists of address generators, simple stride incrementers, 
per-bank issue state, and a small arbiter to merge speculative reads 
with demand requests. There is no global cross-channel coordinator: 
each channel executes only its own segment, and each bank manages 
only its own queuing and buffering.
7.2.3. Energy overhead
The dominant energy cost of the added structures is due to iBuffer 
accesses, since the iBuffer is the largest SRAM introduced by the 
controller. For reference, prior SRAM characterizations report an access 
energy of approximately 2.4pJ per 32-bit read or write for a 2.5GHz 
SRAM datapath [55]. For a workload with a 4MB working set (roughly 
1, 048,576 32-byte/64-byte line operations), the corresponding cumula
tive iBuffer access energy is on the order of 𝐸𝗂𝖡𝗎𝖿𝖿𝖾𝗋 ≈ 2.52μJ. This is 
less than 0.3% of the total DRAM energy for the same working set, as 
measured with DRAMPower.
The incremental dynamic energy of PAQ lookups, per-bank row-hit 
counters, and conflict-window metadata updates is negligible compared 
to iBuffer accesses, since these structures consist of narrow counters 
and short shift registers. The channel-aware segmentation logic in the 
Nucleus is dominated by address bit extraction and bookkeeping FIFOs 
and is similarly negligible.
Despite their small internal energy footprint, these mechanisms 
reduce off-chip DRAM energy substantially: by keeping rows open only 
while they are locally useful, and by converting future misses into short
latency iBuffer hits, InterStellar 2.0 reduces DRAM traffic and therefore 
directly lowers DRAM activation and read energy. Measurements using 
DRAMPower indicate average DRAM energy reductions of ∼24% and 
reductions of up to 60% in favorable cases.
8. Experimental environment
Our evaluation focuses on validating the architectural mechanisms 
of InterStellar 2.0 using timing-accurate system simulation (gem5) 
coupled with a detailed DRAM timing model (Ramulator). This setup 
captures bank/bank-group timing constraints and controller queueing 
effects while allowing exploration of multi-channel organizations. 
8.1. Simulation platform
We evaluate InterStellar 2.0 using a cycle-level simulation frame
work that integrates gem5 [56] with Ramulator. The simulated system 
is a RISC-V out-of-order processor complex with a high-performance 
memory hierarchy modeled after a Neoverse-class core/memory sub
system [57]. The main parameters are summarized in Table  1. The 
core model is an 8-wide superscalar backend with a 64-entry issue 
queue, 32-entry load/store queues, and a 192-entry ROB. Private L1
I/L1-D caches (64kB, 4-way, 3-cycle latency) and private L2 caches 
(512kB, 8-way, 10-cycle latency) feed into a shared LLC (2MB, 16-way, 
30-cycle latency). We model realistic MSHR capacities at each level 
and include several aggressive hardware prefetchers (AMPM, BOP, 
IMP, SlimAMPM, SPP, and a stride/stream prefetcher) to ensure that 
InterStellar 2.0 is evaluated in the presence of conventional prefetch 
hardware.
On the memory side, DRAM is modeled using Micron DDR4 timing 
at 2400MHz, FR-FCFS-style scheduling with row-hit prioritization, and 
an address mapping of the form RoBaBgColRaCh, which preserves 
column locality while distributing requests across banks and channels. 
The baseline memory controller is extended with the iPP and iBatch 
units described earlier, including per-bank iBuffer structures and the 
PAQ (Pending ACT Queue). InterStellar 2.0 parameters in Table  1 
reflect the default configuration: 4kB iBuffer per bank and a 256-entry 
page/locality tracking structure for iPP.
Because gem5+Ramulator modeling fidelity has been questioned 
in recent work [58], we performed validation passes similar to those 
in the original study. First, we exercised pointer-chase style access 
patterns (e.g., spmv-like indirect streams) to measure unloaded latency 
and confirmed that observed access time matches the expected DRAM 
timing for row hits vs. row conflicts. Second, we stressed bandwidth 
using dense streaming kernels such as daxpy and verified that the 
sustained bandwidth converges to the theoretical channel bandwidth 
under full activation pressure. Third, targeted microbenchmarks were 
used to confirm that row hits, row conflicts, and bank-level parallelism 
are reflected with the correct latency deltas. These checks provide 
confidence that the DRAM model reproduces timing-sensitive behavior 
(hit vs. conflict vs. bank parallelism) that InterStellar 2.0 relies on.
8.2. Baseline controllers
We compare InterStellar 2.0 against 4 schedulers representative 
of commercial and academic practice. (1) An FR-FCFS controller with 
an always-open-page policy (prioritizes row hits opportunistically). (2) 
A COTS-style adaptive page policy that dynamically decides whether 
to keep or close a row. (3) PARBS (Parallelism-Aware Batch Schedul
ing), which batches requests per core to increase fairness and service 
parallelism [59]. (4) BLISS (Blacklisting Memory Scheduler), which 
deprioritizes interference-heavy requesters to reduce slowdown [29]. 
We also evaluate all policies under multiple hardware prefetchers 
(AMPM, BOP, IMP, SlimAMPM, SPP, and Stride) [49,60–62], since 
prefetch-driven traffic can affect row-buffer residency and batching 
depth. PARBS and BLISS are included primarily for the multi-core case, 
since they are designed as multi-core throughput/fairness schedulers; 
InterStellar 2.0 is evaluated under both single-core and multi-core load 
to unify comparison.
8.3. Workloads
Our evaluation uses 36 memory-intensive kernels drawn from Poly
Bench, BLAS/LAPACK-style numeric kernels [63,64], stencil codes, 
data mining and machine learning workloads, and graph/irregular 
HPC-style codes. These benchmarks span predominantly direct, stride
regular accesses (e.g., daxpy, gesummv, heat-3d); multi
dimensional stencils (jacobi-2d, fdtd-2d, seidel-2d); mixed di
rect+indirect access patterns (spmv, knn-2d, srad_v2); and
histogram-like, scatter/gather kernels representative of streaming an
alytics. Table  2 summarizes each benchmark’s ID, suite, access type, 
number of extracted streams, and dimensional pattern class. Direct ker
nels are further split by stride regime: ‘‘DS’’ (small stride, e.g., element
size stride), ‘‘DL’’ (large stride sweeps), ‘‘DM’’ (mixture of small- and 
large-stride direct streams), and ‘‘MX’’ (mixture of direct and indirect 
streams). Table  2 lists single-kernel benchmark instances used for both 
14 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Table 2
Used BMs ID, Name, Suite, Stream type (T): (DS: Direct with small stride, DL: Direct with large stride, DM: Direct with mixed small and large strides, and MX: 
Mixture of direct and Indirect stream.),  Streams Number (S), and Pattern (P).
 ID BM Suite T S P ID BM Suite T S P ID BM Suite T S P 
 A atax ALGEBRA DS 1 2D B bicg ALGEBRA DS 1 2D C daxpy LAPACK DS 2 1D  D daxpys LAPACK DL 2 1D E ddot LAPACK DS 2 1D F ddots LAPACK DL 2 1D  G doitgen ALGEBRA DS 3 3D H dscal LAPACK DS 1 1D I dscals LAPACK DL 1 1D  J fdtd-2d Stencil DS 3 2D K floyd-warshall Dyn. Prog. DS 1 2D L gemver BLAS DM 9 2D  M gesummv BLAS DS 5 2D N heat-3d Stencil DS 2 3D O Jacobi-1d Stencil DS 2 1D  P Jacobi-2d Stencil DS 2 2D Q knn-1d Data Mining MX 3 1D R knn-2d Data Mining MX 5 2D  S knn-3d Data Mining MX 7 3D T memcpy Memory DS 2 1D U mvt BLAS DM 5 2D  V scusumbkn LAPACK DS 2 1D W scusumbkns LAPACK DL 2 1D X seidel-2d Stencil DS 4 2D  Y spmv HPCG MX 5 2D Z histo Parboil MX 2 2D 𝛼 stencil Parboil MX 2 2D  𝛽 needle Rodinia MX 5 2D 𝛾 srad_v2 Rodinia MX 7 2D 𝛿 histogram Phoenix MX 4 1D  𝜖 linear regression Phoenix DS 2 2D 𝜁 mm Phoenix DS 3 2D 𝜂 pca Phoenix DS 3 2D  𝜅 reverse index Phoenix MX 7 2D 𝜆 string match Phoenix DS 1 1D 𝜇 word count Phoenix MX 2 1D 
1C and homogeneous 8C runs. Table  3 separately defines the hetero
geneous 8-core mixes (Z1–Z8), where different benchmarks execute 
concurrently across cores. For LAPACK-style kernels, we evaluate two 
modes. In the fixed-stride mode (e.g., daxpy, ddot, dscal), array 
traversals use an 8-byte stride (double-precision). In the stride-sweep 
mode (e.g., daxpys, ddots, dscals), we sweep strides from 16B 
up to 4KB to emulate sparse or tiled access. The ‘‘s’’ suffix in Table 
2 indicates this stride-sweep variant. This stress test is important for 
iPP, because large strides shorten the useful row-hit window and 
increase row conflicts if the controller’s policy is not stream-aware. In 
figures where these stride variants appear, we append a suffix to the 
benchmark name (e.g., _1C, _2C, _4C) to denote stride = 1/2/4 cache 
lines, respectively.
In addition to single-kernel runs, we construct heterogeneous multi
core mixes in which different benchmarks execute on different cores 
concurrently. Table  3 lists eight such mixes (Z1–Z8). These mixes 
include combinations of (i) dense streaming kernels, (ii) irregular/
indirect kernels, and (iii) communication-heavy kernels (e.g., memcpy
like behavior). This stresses fairness, interference between streams 
mapped to the same bank, and controller behavior when multiple 
bursty producers share memory bandwidth.
8.4. InterStellar 2.0 experiments design
We run extended experiments to quantify the multiple channels and 
fine grained performance in three categories: 1- DRAM Channel Scaling. 
2- stencil fine grained performance enhancement. 3- iBatch and iBuffer 
size sweep as DRAM channels are scaled.
1- Channel scaling We study scalability across up to 32 channels. 
We sweep the DRAM organization across {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32} chan
nels while holding per-channel timing, per-bank buffer sizes, and per
core configuration constant. Each channel is instantiated with its own 
controller, iPP state, and iBatch/iBuffer/PAQ structures, and address 
mapping interleaves consecutive accesses across different DRAM chan
nels. Each channel is instantiated with its own memory-controller 
instance for all evaluated multi-channel policies (InterStellar 2.0 and 
PARBS/BLISS/COTS), under the same cache-line interleaving address 
mapping across channels. InterStellar 1.0 is evaluated only for the 
single-channel configuration.
2- Fine grained stream definition’s enhancement on stencil BMs.
Two stencil BMs are used to explore the improvement associated with 
the fine grained sub-stream definition introduced in InterStellar 2.0. 
The selected BMs are: jacobi-2d and seidel-2d. The stencil BMs 
also are running on stride = 3 to avoid overlapping the sub-streams 
accesses as in the latter case, some sub-streams would be ready in cache 
memory from earlier accesses. We compare the E2E cycles speedup and 
BW improvement of using fine grained streams over coarse grained 
streams.
3- iBatch depth at practical iBuffer size sweep exploration. In the 
single channel case, iBatch depth was constrained by iBuffer capacity 
and bank timing. InterStellar 2.0 introduces PAQ per bank, which can 
temporarily hold predicted accesses when the iBuffer is full. Also an 
important factor is that iBatch is sub-divided over multiple channels. 
To quantify the value of this decoupling, we sweep the iBatch depth, 
which is the known lookahead window, i.e., number of known future 
row-hit lines issued per sub-stream once a row becomes active. In the 
multi-channel case, deeper logical iBatches do not necessarily imply 
proportionally larger per-channel iBuffers, because each channel only 
services its own batch segment. Evaluating this design space isolates 
how PAQ and per-channel segmentation affect latency hiding and 
bank-level interference under heavy memory pressure.
8.5. Metrics
We report three primary metrics:
1.Normalized end-to-end speedup. For policy 𝑃, we compute
Speedup𝑃=Execution Time (COTS adaptive page policy)
Execution Time (𝑃) ,
where the baseline is a COTS-style adaptive page policy con
troller.
2.Normalized bandwidth. For policy 𝑃, we define bandwidth as
𝐵𝑊𝑃=Total bytes transferred to/from DRAM
Total active DRAM cycles ,
and report 𝐵𝑊𝑃∕𝐵𝑊COTS. This captures effective channel/bank 
utilization and row-buffer efficiency.
3.Normalized DRAM energy. Using traces from Ramulator and 
DRAMPower [65], we estimate the DRAM energy for each policy 
and report it normalized to COTS. This reflects the impact of iPP 
(fewer wasted activates/precharges) and iBatch (higher row-hit 
rates, fewer long-latency demand reads).
Unless otherwise stated, all results are reported for both single-core 
and 8-core systems; multi-core experiments include both homogeneous 
(same benchmark per core) and heterogeneous mixes from Table  3.
9. Evaluation
This section evaluates InterStellar 2.0. We begin by revisiting and 
extending the baseline single-channel results from InterStellar to estab
lish the sources of performance gain in isolation (Section 9.1). We then 
present multicore scaling results and compare against prior memory 
controller policies (Section 9.2). Next, we introduce the new evaluation 
axes enabled by InterStellar 2.0: multi-channel scaling (Section 9.6), 
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
15 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Table 3
Selected BMs for the mixed-case eight-core setup.
 ID C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 
 Z1 atax bicg dscal gesummv atax bicg dscal gesummv  Z2 memcpy gesummv knn1d spmv memcpy gesummv knn1d spmv  Z3 memcpy mvt ddot spmv daxpy gesummv knn1d dscal  Z4 atax mvt histogram spmvid daxpy lin.reg. knn1d dscal  Z5 gemver scusumkbn srad_v2 memcpy dscal bicg knn2d gesummv  Z6 knn1d daxpy dscal gesummv knn1d daxpy dscal gesummv  Z7 histogram lin.reg. atax bicg histogram lin.reg. atax bicg  Z8 memcpy scusumkbn srad_v2 gesummv daxpy dscal daxpy dscal 
batch-depth and buffer sizing sensitivity (Section 9.8), , Finally, we 
study interaction with hardware prefetchers (Section 9.3) and DRAM 
energy (Section 9.4).
Unless otherwise noted, results use an 8-core out-of-order RISC-V 
system integrated with a cycle-accurate memory controller and DDR
class DRAM timing, as described in Section 8. All performance values 
are reported as normalized end-to-end (E2E) speedup relative to COTS 
baseline, and all bandwidth values are reported as delivered memory 
bandwidth normalized to that same baseline.
9.1. Single-core performance and sources of gain
This experiment isolates a single core running one benchmark (BM) 
at a time to quantify the intrinsic benefits of the InterStellar mech
anisms (per-stream intelligent Page Policy, iPP, and per-stream de
terministic batching, iBatch) without multicore interference. Fig.  15 
reports normalized E2E speedup and normalized delivered DRAM band
width across all evaluated BMs. Fig.  16 breaks down DRAM request 
types (row hits, row misses, row conflicts, and serviced iBatch hits) 
for representative BMs. We choose these representative benchmarks to 
span distinct memory behaviors that InterStellar 2.0 targets: (i) highly 
row-local direct streaming (high row-hit opportunity), (ii) conflict
heavy alternation/thrashing that inflates active DRAM cycles, and (iii) 
mixed direct+indirect patterns where interference between regular and 
irregular slices stresses stream-aware page policy. Across all single-core 
experiments, InterStellar achieves on average: 1.44× normalized E2E 
speedup and 2.7× normalized bandwidth improvement versus the COTS 
baseline. For direct-stream workloads with short stride (e.g., dense 
vector/row scans), the gains are higher: 1.6× average speedup and 
3.3× bandwidth improvement. These kernels exhibit high intra-stream 
locality but normally suffer when two or more streams alternate quickly 
enough to force row thrashing. InterStellar prevents this thrashing.
For long-stride direct streams (e.g., strided daxpy-like loops, scatter/
gather-like copies), iPP is the primary contributor. As stride increases, 
accesses are spread across many DRAM rows; the opportunity to form 
large iBatch bursts naturally decreases. In this regime, iPP converts 
most ‘‘row conflicts’’ (activate/precharge ping-pong between rows in 
the same bank) into ‘‘row misses’’ (activate-on-idle) for the next stream. 
On representative long-stride kernels such as scusumbkns, sweeping 
the stride from 512 B to 4 kB shows that the maximum iPP-only 
speedup reaches 1.25× at a stride of 2 kB, even though batching 
opportunities diminish. This is because the page-closing decision is 
made with stream-aware knowledge of when the next request will force 
a different row.
For mixed direct/indirect workloads (e.g., sparse gather/scatter pat
terns similar to spmv), iPP leverages the per-stream conflict-tracking 
window to decide when to close a row. Meanwhile, iBatch buffers the 
predictable portions of direct streams so that they no longer ‘‘pollute’’ 
the indirect-stream locality counters. This separation prevents an irreg
ular access slice from forcing premature precharge in a regular slice, 
and vice versa.
Hence, even in the absence of other cores and other streams, de
fault memory controllers waste cycles on preventable row conflicts 
and short-lived row reuse. By combining batched row-hit bursts with 
per-stream (rather than per-bank) row-buffer residency decisions, In
terStellar converts those cycles into useful bandwidth.
9.2. Multicore performance (8-core baseline)
We now run all 8 cores concurrently. We compare InterStellar 
with (i) a modern adaptive COTS controller, (ii) PARBS, and (iii) 
BLISS. PARBS and BLISS are representative hardware-only schedulers 
that form batches or deprioritize requestors at the granularity of 
cores/threads to reduce starvation and interference. Fig.  17 shows 
normalized E2E speedup for each BM, and Fig.  18 shows representative 
DRAM request-type distributions.
On an 8-core system:
• InterStellar achieves up to 2.72× E2E speedup (PolyBench class 
kernels).
• PARBS reaches up to 1.6×.
• BLISS reaches up to 1.2×.
•On average across all BMs, InterStellar achieves 1.5× E2E
speedup versus the COTS controller.
Large gains for C/D/E are expected because they map to streaming 
BLAS/LAPACK vector kernels (e.g., daxpy, daxpys, ddot) that are 
strongly bandwidth-bound and therefore highly sensitive to reductions 
in row conflicts and active DRAM service cycles. The key difference is 
granularity. PARBS and BLISS cluster by core. This works well when 
each core runs a single dominant stream with little internal conflict 
(e.g., in mixes like Z1, where each core runs a mostly single-stream 
kernel). But in multi-stream or mixed-access kernels, a single core can 
generate several interfering access streams; batching at core granularity 
interleaves those streams and still destroys row locality. InterStellar, 
in contrast, batches and applies page policy at stream granularity, not 
core granularity. As a result, conflicts drop sharply, many would-be 
misses become iBatch hits, and even indirect streams see fewer forced 
precharges. The needle BM is a noteworthy stress case. It generates 
multiple co-active streams with complex patterns that quickly fill and 
churn the iBuffer. With a small per-bank iBuffer (4 kB), needle shows 
limited or even negative speedup due to iBuffer turnover. However, 
increasing iBuffer capacity raises the speedup to >1×, demonstrating 
that locality is present and capturable, but more buffering is required 
to expose it. This motivates the InterStellar 2.0 extension of decoupling 
batch depth from the physical buffer size using a Pending ACT Queue 
(PAQ) (Section 9.8).
In multicore settings, interference among streams — both within 
a core and across cores — is the main reason why memory stalls 
dominate execution. Per-stream batching and per-stream page policy, 
as implemented by InterStellar, directly attack that interference, unlike 
core-centric schedulers.
9.3. Interaction with hardware prefetchers
To demonstrate orthogonality to cache-level hardware prefetchers 
(HWPs), we evaluate InterStellar and InterStellar 2.0 both with and 
without several state-of-the-art HWPs (AMPM, BOP, IMP, SlimAMPM, 
SPP, and Stride). We consider two scenarios: (i) COTS controller + 
HWP only, (ii) InterStellar/InterStellar 2.0 alone (no HWP), and (iii) 
InterStellar/InterStellar 2.0 combined with each HWP. The reported 
results here are averaged across the full workload suites. Fig.  19 
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
16 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 15. Single-core (1C) normalized E2E speedup and delivered bandwidth versus the COTS adaptive controller. One benchmark instance runs on one core while 
all other cores are idle.
Fig. 16. Single-core DRAM statistics for representative BMs: breakdown of 
requests into row hits, iBatch hits, row misses, and row conflicts. Inter* refers 
to InterStellar.
shows that InterStellar alone achieves up to 3× E2E speedup over 
COTS+HWP, and adding InterStellar on top of an HWP delivers up 
to 2.5× additional speedup beyond that HWP alone. Fig.  20 shows 
that InterStellar increases delivered memory bandwidth by 2.02× on 
average versus COTS+HWP, primarily because it eliminates repeated 
row conflicts and reduces active DRAM cycles per useful byte.
These results generalize to InterStellar 2.0, where the prefetcher 
still runs at the cache hierarchy, but the controller remains in charge 
of deterministic per-stream batching and per-stream page policy on 
each channel. Critically, InterStellar 2.0 does not rely on speculative 
injection of requests into already congested controller queues. Instead, 
it issues batches from within the controller, after a demand access opens 
a row, so those batches are inherently row-hit dense and scheduled in 
a DRAM-friendly order.
Traditional HWPs speculate early and suffer from cache pollution, 
MSHR pressure, and queue backpressure. InterStellar and InterStellar 
2.0 batch late (at the controller), deterministically, and per stream. As 
a result, they can outperform HWPs and stack on top of them.
9.4. DRAM energy and active-cycle reduction
To quantify memory energy effects, we estimate DRAM energy 
using DRAMPower-style modeling on controller traces. Fig.  21 shows 
normalized DRAM energy for selected BMs in an 8-core setup, com
paring InterStellar (no HWP), COTS+HWP, PARBS, and BLISS. We 
evaluate 10 representative homogeneous workloads selected to span 
Table  2’s diversity in stream type (direct vs. mixed direct+indirect) 
and, importantly, stream concurrency (from single-stream kernels to 
multi-stream workloads such as srad_v2)On average, InterStellar 
reduces DRAM energy by 24% versus COTS without HWP and by 17% 
versus COTS with HWP. In workloads with multiple interfering streams 
(e.g., daxpy, ddot, scusumkbn), energy is reduced by up to 60% 
versus COTS without HWP and up to 54% versus COTS+HWP. The 
reduction comes from eliminating repeated row opens/precharges and 
from shrinking active DRAM time per useful byte.
9.5. 32-Channel results: E2E and bandwidth gains
All results in this section use the eight-core (8C) configuration 
described in Table  1. Speedups are normalized against COTS running 
on 32-DRAM channels. Fig.  22 reports normalized end-to-end (E2E) 
speedup across the benchmark set when scaling to a 32-channel DRAM 
system. InterStellar 2.0 (striped gray bars) consistently outperforms 
PARBS, BLISS, and a STREAM/Stride prefetcher–driven baseline. Across 
all BMs, InterStellar 2.0 attains up to 2.92× E2E speedup, with a 1.47×
average speedup relative to the COTS adaptive controller.
Fig.  23 shows delivered DRAM bandwidth normalized to COTS. 
InterStellar 2.0 converts controller cycles spent on row conflicts into 
dense row-hit service, yielding substantially higher effective bandwidth 
even in interference-heavy cases. The gains are broad: dense linear 
algebra, stencils, and mixed direct+indirect kernels all benefit once 
segmented iBatch and per-stream iPP operate per channel.
9.6. Channel sweep: 1 → 32 channels
To study scalability, we sweep the memory system across {1, 2, 
4, 8, 16, 32} channels while holding per-channel timing, per-bank 
buffers, and core configuration constant. This sweep is an isolation 
study of memory-parallelism scaling and inter-channel independence. 
Figs.  24 and 25 plot normalized E2E and bandwidth, respectively. Two 
observations emerge:
1. Bandwidth scales nearly linearly with channel count under 
InterStellar 2.0. Segmented iBatch ensures each channel gener
ates only its own row-hit runs and never stalls on a global batch 
queue. As channels double, delivered bandwidth with InterStel
lar 2.0 almost doubles as well, whereas the COTS controller 
leaves bandwidth on the table due to cross-stream conflicts 
within banks.
2. E2E tracks bandwidth when kernels are memory-bound. For 
daxpy-like, stencil, and histogram kernels, E2E improves with 
channels in lockstep with bandwidth. Compute-heavier cases 
show smaller E2E improves once memory pressure is relieved, 
as expected.
9.7. Fine-grained sub-streams for stencils
We quantify the effect of fine-grained sub-stream descriptors on two 
stencils: jacobi-2d and seidel-2d. We compare a coarse descrip
tion (one stream per array: ‘‘1S’’) against a fine-grained description 
(three sub-streams per array, one per row slice: ‘‘3S’’). All runs use 
stride 𝑆 = 3 to avoid cache overlap between slices. Fig.  26 reports 
normalized E2E and bandwidth. Results show the following:
(1) seidel-2d: up to 35% E2E improvement (1.35×) and larger 
bandwidth gain when moving from 1S to 3S. Seidel’s stencil exhibits 
17 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 17. Eight-core (8C) normalized E2E speedup versus the COTS adaptive controller for InterStellar, PARBS, BLISS, and Open-Page. Bars include homogeneous 
8-core runs (same benchmark replicated on all cores) and heterogeneous mixes (Z1–Z8 from Table  3), as labeled on the 𝑥-axis.
Fig. 18. DRAM request breakdown for representative BMs on 8 cores. Inter
Stellar aggressively converts conflicts/misses into row hits and iBatch hits.
Fig. 19.  8-core average normalized E2E speedup. Comparison of InterStellar 
vs. six HWPs, and InterStellar+HWP vs. HWP alone.
Fig. 20.  8-core average normalized bandwidth improvement. InterStellar vs. 
HWPs (COTS baseline).
strong per-row locality that iPP can fully exploit once each sub-stream 
maintains independent counters.
(2) jacobi-2d: modest E2E improvement of ∼5%. Jacobi’s access 
pattern already exposes two dominant streams with fewer interleavings; 
sub-stream isolation helps, but the baseline is closer to ideal. Overall, 
the gains are primarily driven by iPP: tracking each sub-stream sepa
rately prevents premature precharges caused by mixed histories in the 
coarse model.
Fig. 21.  8-core normalized DRAM energy consumption vs. COTS baseline 
(lower is better).
9.8. iBatch depth sweep at practical iBuffer size
We now sweep the iBatch lookahead depth while fixing a practical 
iBuffer size of 8kB per bank and using PAQ to decouple logical depth 
from instantaneous issue capacity. Fig.  27 summarizes normalized E2E 
and bandwidth. Key findings are as follows.
(1) Depth >64 lines delivers a clear step up in E2E. With seg
mented batches across channels, deeper windows keep more future row 
hits resident in the per-bank pipeline, improving overlap and reducing 
controller idle gaps.
(2) Diminishing returns beyond very deep windows. Past ∼96
128 lines, additional depth is limited by DRAM timing (e.g.,
𝑡𝐹𝐴𝑊 /𝑡𝑅𝑅𝐷), PAQ drain rate, and interference from other active sub
streams within the same bank.
(3) No proportional iBuffer growth is required in multi-channel.
Because each channel handles only its segment, the same 8kB iBuffer 
per bank suffices for beneficial depth (≥64). 
9.9. Scalability study with larger LLC and higher concurrency
Setup. To study sensitivity to a larger cache hierarchy and higher 
concurrency, we repeat the channel-scaling experiment using a 16-core
system with a 16MB LLC, and run only LINPACK/BLAS-style streaming 
kernels (daxpy, ddot, dscal, scusumkbn) due to simulation-time 
constraints. For this experiment, the working-set size is set to 18MB 
(per kernel), so the access stream still experiences capacity pressure 
and produces sustained LLC evictions and DRAM traffic. Increasing LLC 
capacity can reduce pressure on main memory and therefore reduce the 
end-to-end gains from InterStellar 2.0. However, this effect is workload 
dependent. Workloads with (i) streaming behavior and low cache-line 
reuse, or (ii) working sets that are comparable to or larger than LLC 
will still generate substantial LLC misses and remain DRAM-bound, and 
therefore can continue to benefit from InterStellar 2.0 as shown in Figs. 
18 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 22. 32-channel normalized E2E speedup versus COTS for PARBS, BLISS, STREAM prefetcher, and InterStellar 2.0. For daxpys, ddots, dscals, and scusumkbns 
workloads: _1C, _2C, and _4C denotes stride = 1, 2, and 4 cache lines respectively.
Fig. 23. 32-channel normalized bandwidth versus COTS for PARBS, BLISS, STREAM prefetcher, and InterStellar 2.0.
Fig. 24. E2E speedup vs. COTS as channels scale from 1 to 32.
28 and 29. Moving from 8 to 16 cores increases concurrent memory 
pressure and interference among outstanding streams, which typically 
increases row conflicts and contention under conventional controllers. 
This additional conflict pressure increases the opportunity for Inter
Stellar 2.0 to convert conflict-heavy service into denser row-hit service 
and more effective batching, improving throughput in memory-bound 
phases. Fig.  28 reports normalized end-to-end (E2E) cycle reduction 
(speedup), and Fig.  29 reports normalized bandwidth improvement, 
for channel counts from 1 to 32. Normalization is per channel count: 
e.g., InterStellar 2.0 at 2 channels is normalized against the COTS 
controller at 2 channels, and similarly for 4/8/16/32 channels.
10. Related work
We group related work into three areas: (i) HW/SW co-design for 
stream-aware memory systems, (ii) HW/SW cooperation frameworks 
for memory control, and (iii) DRAM controller scheduling and page 
policy mechanisms.
10.1. Stream-aware HW/SW co-design
InterStellar [37] introduced a HW/SW interface in which the com
piler identifies streams—regular access patterns such as affine (direct) 
streams and indirect streams—and communicates these patterns to 
19 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 25. Normalized bandwidth vs. COTS as channels scale from 1 to 32. InterStellar 2.0 makes efficient use of added channels asiBatch spans all channels.
Fig. 26. Fine-grained streaming for stencils: E2E speedup and bandwidth 
improvement when moving from coarse (1S) to fine-grained (3S) descriptors 
at 𝑆 =3.
Fig. 27.  With 32-channels: iBatch depth sweep with fixed iBuffer = 8kB per 
bank. E2E and bandwidth improve markedly once depth exceeds 64 lines.
hardware using compact descriptors. The hardware-side nucleus (Nu
cleus) associates these descriptors with LLC misses and forwards the 
stream ID and basic access metadata to the memory controller. The 
controller then applies two policies: (i) an intelligent Page Policy (iPP), 
which decides DRAM row-buffer residency per stream (rather than per 
bank), and (ii) iBatch, which proactively issues bursts of predicted row 
hits for that stream, buffers the resulting data locally at the controller, 
and returns them to the core on demand. This HW/SW cooperation 
reduces DRAM row conflicts and improves effective bandwidth without 
requiring ISA extensions or OS/runtime changes.
InterStellarRT [66] extends the same philosophy to real-time sys
tems, but with an explicitly timing-driven objective. It targets affine 
(direct) streams and uses compiler-provided descriptors to construct 
groups of row hits (rtBatch) and to schedule those groups deterministi
cally. InterStellarRT adopts an address mapping that has consecutive 
requests across DDR4/DDR5 bank groups and serves each batch using 
a BR-FR-FCFS (Batch-Ready First-Ready First-Come-First-Serve) policy, 
enforcing uninterrupted service of that batch. This structure enables 
significantly tighter worst-case and interference bounds than prior real
time DRAM controllers, while still improving throughput and sustained 
bandwidth. InterStellarRT reports up to 3.8× tighter isolated worst-case 
memory latency bounds and up to 13.5× tighter interference bounds 
over state-of-the-art predictable controllers. These guarantees are valu
able for real-time systems; they are orthogonal to the high-throughput, 
multi-channel scalability objective of InterStellar 2.0.
InterStellar 2.0 builds directly on InterStellar. First, InterStellar 
2.0 scales stream-aware control to multi-channel DDR-class systems 
by segmenting each stream’s predicted future accesses across chan
nels. Each DRAM channel receives only its own segment and inde
pendently applies batching, buffering, and per-bank row policy. This 
eliminates cross-channel coordination and shared backpressure, and 
it preserves timing closure at high controller frequency as channel 
count increases. Second, InterStellar 2.0 introduces fine-grained sub
stream descriptors: instead of treating all accesses from a complex loop 
(e.g., multiple stencil planes) as one stream, the compiler emits multiple 
sub-streams. The controller tracks locality (row-hit counters, conflict 
windows) separately per sub-stream and per bank. This prevents un
related access slices from polluting each other’s locality history and 
improves DRAM row-buffer residency and row-hit rate. Together, these 
extensions allow InterStellar 2.0 to scale delivered bandwidth with 
channel count and to preserve locality within complex loop bodies, 
while remaining ISA-compatible and OS-transparent like InterStel
lar.  Recent stacked-memory deployments expose many independently 
scheduled command domains (channels and pseudo-channels), moti
vating mechanisms that scale across many domains without global 
coordination bottlenecks [67,68]. Recent work explores HBM3-based 
near-data processing accelerators that use hardware–software co-design 
to map DNN dataflow efficiently while respecting area and thermal con
straints, reducing the memory wall and improving throughput. [69]. 
InterStellar 2.0 is complementary: its segmented batching and per
domain iPP/iBatch operate at the abstraction of an independently 
scheduled domain and therefore extend naturally to these organizations 
without relying on DDR4-specific assumptions.
10.2. HW/SW cooperation for memory management
A number of prior systems explore HW/SW interfaces that expose 
semantic information about memory regions to hardware. Täko [70] 
20 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
Fig. 28. 16-core, 16MB LLC: normalized E2E cycle speedup for LINPACK kernels across channel counts.
Fig. 29. 16-core, 16MB LLC: normalized bandwidth improvement for LINPACK kernels across channel counts.
allows software to tag ‘‘phantom data’’ regions and registers software 
callbacks that are invoked on cache events (miss, eviction, write
back) for those regions; the callbacks can implement custom memory
management actions, supported by in-cache execution hardware.
XMem and MetaSys [35,36,71] generalize this model using explicit 
metadata objects (‘‘atoms’’) that are attached to memory regions. The 
ISA is extended to create, map, and unmap these atoms, and the 
OS participates in maintaining and interpreting them. The hardware 
then uses atom metadata to guide placement, migration, coherence, or 
scheduling policy.
These frameworks demonstrate that exposing semantic intent from 
software can improve memory behavior, but they rely on ISA changes, 
OS/runtime cooperation, and page- or region-granularity tagging. By 
contrast, InterStellar, InterStellarRT, and InterStellar 2.0 communi
cate per-stream descriptors using existing CSR space (or a reserved 
MMIO range), requiring no ISA extensions. The granularity is not an 
OS page but a compiler-identified stream or sub-stream. The nucleus 
(Nucleus) attaches this metadata to individual LLC misses, so the 
memory controller can act on a per-stream (and in InterStellar 2.0, 
per-sub-stream) basis when applying batching and page policy. This 
avoids programmer-inserted callbacks and avoids kernel modification 
while still enabling software-guided control at cache-line granularity.
10.3. DRAM scheduling and page policies
Commodity DRAM controllers traditionally employ FR-FCFS (First
Ready, First-Come-First-Serve) scheduling and heuristic/adaptive page 
policies (open-page, closed-page, or adaptive switching). FR-FCFS pri
oritizes row hits for throughput and uses arrival order as a tie-breaker. 
Adaptive page policies monitor recent hit/miss activity per bank and 
attempt to infer whether to keep a row open or precharge it. These 
techniques improve average throughput but remain reactive and bank
centric: they neither anticipate future accesses beyond what is currently 
queued nor distinguish which loop, stream, or kernel generated each 
request.
To improve fairness and QoS in multicore systems, many schedulers 
cluster, rank, or throttle requests at the granularity of cores or appli
cations. Examples include PARBS, BLISS, TCM, ATLAS, STFM, MISE, 
DASH, and staged schedulers [28–33,72,73]. These proposals manage 
interference and starvation, often by forming batches or deprioritizing 
‘‘aggressor’’ requesters. Other work applies reinforcement learning to 
dynamically optimize DRAM scheduling decisions, reporting up to 
∼1.3× average speedup over FR-FCFS-like baselines [34]. All of these 
techniques are hardware-only: they infer structure from timing and 
queue state but do not consume compiler-provided access semantics.
In contrast, InterStellar and InterStellar 2.0 explicitly move stream 
semantics into the controller. iPP replaces purely bank-level heuristics 
with per-stream (and, in InterStellar 2.0, per-sub-stream) row-buffer 
residency tracking, allowing the controller to close a row precisely 
when that stream’s useful locality is exhausted. iBatch replaces oppor
tunistic reordering with deterministic, software-informed bursts of row 
hits that are buffered locally at the controller, preventing both cache 
pollution and MSHR/read-queue saturation. InterStellar 2.0 further 
decentralizes this logic by generating channel-segmented batches so 
that each DRAM channel can schedule, buffer, and enforce page pol
icy independently, without cross-channel backpressure. This delivers 
high effective bandwidth on multi-channel DDR-class systems while 
preserving compatibility with unmodified ISAs and operating systems.
11. Conclusion
InterStellar 2.0 advances stream-aware HW/SW memory control 
to many-channel DRAM while preserving compatibility—no ISA or 
OS changes. By partitioning stream-informed batching across channels 
and tracking fine-grained sub-streams, each controller bank makes 
precise local decisions that convert conflict-heavy DRAM requests into 
row-hit bursts. Across 1–32 DRAM channels on an 8-core platform, 
InterStellar 2.0 delivers up to 2.92× end-to-end speedup and up to 
2.83× higher sustained bandwidth versus a COTS controller; fine
grained tracking alone provides up to 1.35× improvement. These results 
demonstrate that stream-informed memory control provides a scalable 
21 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
and architecture-agnostic foundation for future high-bandwidth DDR
class and heterogeneous memory systems, enabling higher efficiency 
without sacrificing compatibility or design simplicity.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Abdelrhman Mohamed Abotaleb: Writing – original draft, Visu
alization, Validation, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Con
ceptualization. Maziar Goudarzi: Writing – original draft, Methodol
ogy, Conceptualization. Tomasz Czajkowski: Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Conceptualization. Reza Azimi: Writing – original draft, 
Methodology, Conceptualization. Mohamed Hassan: Writing – review 
& editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervi
sion, Software, Methodology, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] A. Bakshi, J.-L. Gaudiot, W.-Y. Lin, M. Makhija, V.K. Prasanna, W. Ro, C. Shin, 
Memory latency: to tolerate or to reduce, in: 12th Symposium on Computer 
Architecture and High Performance Computing, SBAC-PAD, 2000.
[2] C. Carvalho, The gap between processor and memory speeds, in: IEEE 
International Conference on Control and Automation, ICCA, 2002.
[3] S. Eyerman, W. Heirman, I. Hur, DRAM bandwidth and latency stacks: Visu
alizing DRAM bottlenecks, in: IEEE International Symposium on Performance 
Analysis of Systems and Software, ISPASS, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ISPASS55109.2022.00045.
[4] C.-Y. Liu, H.M. Waidyasooriya, M. Hariyama, Data-transfer-bottleneck-less ar
chitecture for FPGA-based quantum annealing simulation, in: 7th International 
Symposium on Computing and Networking, CANDAR, 2019, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/CANDAR.2019.00028.
[5] D. Lee, Y. Kim, V. Seshadri, J. Liu, L. Subramanian, O. Mutlu, Tiered-latency 
DRAM: A low latency and low cost DRAM architecture, in: ACM/IEEE 19th 
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA, 
2013, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2013.6522354.
[6] O. Mutlu, L. Subramanian, Research problems and opportunities in mem
ory systems, Supercomput. Front. Innov. (2014) http://dx.doi.org/10.14529/
jsfi140302.
[7] H. Luo, T. Shahroodi, H. Hassan, M. Patel, A.G. Yağlıkçı, L. Orosa, J. Park, O. 
Mutlu, CLR-DRAM: A low-cost DRAM architecture enabling dynamic capacity
latency trade-off, in: ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on 
Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA45697.2020.
00061.
[8] H. Hassan, M. Patel, J.S. Kim, A.G. Yaglikci, N. Vijaykumar, N.M. Ghiasi, S. 
Ghose, O. Mutlu, CROW: A low-cost substrate for improving DRAM perfor
mance, energy efficiency, and reliability, in: IEEE 46th Annual International 
Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
3307650.3322231.
[9] JESD79-4A: DDR4 SDRAM, Standard, JEDEC, Arlington, VA, 2021, URL https:
//www.jedec.org/standards-documents/docs/jesd79-4a.
[10] JEDEC Solid State Technology Association, DDR5 SDRAM (JESD79-5c.01_v1.31), 
2024, URL https://www.jedec.org/standards-documents/docs/jesd79-5c01. Edi
torial Revision of JESD79-5C_v1.30, April 2024.
[11] JESD79-3D: DDR3 SDRAM, Standard, JEDEC, Arlington, VA, 2012, URL https:
//www.jedec.org/standards-documents/docs/jesd-79-3d.
[12] ATP Electronics, Why DDR5 matters for servers: Is it worth the switch?, 2023, 
URL https://shorturl.at/4OLoV.
[13] Rambus Inc, Scaling DRAM technology to meet future demands, 2025, URL 
https://www.rambus.com/.
[14] Emergent Mind, High-bandwidth memory (HBM) overview, 2025, URL https:
//shorturl.at/gqvsq. HBM delivers 5–10× the bandwidth of commodity DDR 
by exploiting multiple parallel channels and wide interfaces for HPC and AI 
accelerators.
[15] K. Technology, DDR5 memory standard: An introduction to the next generation 
of dram module technology, 2024, URL https://shorturl.at/SL1vt.
[16] A. Bhiksha, contributors, Memory controllers: The brain behind RAM 
management, 2025, URL https://www.abhik.xyz/concepts/memory/memory
controllers.
[17] H. Nasiri, S. Nasehi, M. Goudarzi, Evaluation of distributed stream processing 
frameworks for IoT applications in smart cities, J. Big Data 6 (2019) http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0215-2.
[18] Z. Wang, T. Nowatzki, Stream-based memory access specialization for general 
purpose processors, in: ACM/IEEE 46th International Symposium on Computer 
Architecture, ISCA, 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3307650.3322229.
[19] J.M. Domingos, N. Neves, N. Roma, P. Tomás, Unlimited vector extension with 
data streaming support, in: ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on 
Computer Architecture, ISCA, IEEE, 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA52012.
2021.00025.
[20] F. Schuiki, F. Zaruba, T. Hoefler, L. Benini, Stream semantic registers: A 
lightweight risc-v isa extension achieving full compute utilization in single-issue 
cores, IEEE Trans. Comput. (TC) 70 (2) (2020) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TC.
2020.2987314.
[21] Z. Wang, J. Weng, J. Lowe-Power, J. Gaur, T. Nowatzki, Stream floating: 
Enabling proactive and decentralized cache optimizations, in: ACM/IEEE Inter
national Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA, 2021, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA51647.2021.00060.
[22] N. Talati, K. May, A. Behroozi, Y. Yang, K. Kaszyk, C. Vasiladiotis, T. Verma, 
L. Li, B. Nguyen, J. Sun, J.M. Morton, A. Ahmadi, T. Austin, M. O’Boyle, S. 
Mahlke, T. Mudge, R. Dreslinski, Prodigy: Improving the memory latency of data
indirect irregular workloads using hardware-software co-design, in: International 
Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA, 2021, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA51647.2021.00061.
[23] Z. Wang, J. Weng, S. Liu, T. Nowatzki, Near-stream computing: General and 
transparent near-cache acceleration, in: IEEE International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
HPCA53966.2022.00032.
[24] Z. Wang, C. Liu, A. Arora, L. John, T. Nowatzki, Infinity stream: Portable 
and programmer-friendly in-/near-memory fusion, in: 28th ACM International 
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating 
Systems, ASPLOS, 2023, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3582016.3582032.
[25] K. Datta, S. Kamil, S. Williams, L. Oliker, J. Shalf, K. Yelick, Optimization and 
performance modeling of stencil computations on modern microprocessors, Soc. 
Ind. Appl. Math. (SIAM) (2009) http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/070693199.
[26] Y. Pei, Q. Cao, G. Bosilca, P. Luszczek, V. Eijkhout, J. Dongarra, Commu
nication avoiding 2d stencil implementations over parsec task-based runtime, 
in: 2020 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium 
Workshops, IPDPSW, IEEE Computer Society, 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
IPDPSW50202.2020.00127.
[27] F. Zhu, X. Qi, P. Zhang, J. Fang, T. Tang, Y. Che, K. Yu, J. Xie, C. Huang, J. 
Ren, Optimizing stencil computation on multi-core DSPs, in: Proceedings of the 
53rd International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP ’24, Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2024, pp. 679–690, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/3673038.3673062.
[28] Y. Kim, M. Papamichael, O. Mutlu, M. Harchol-Balter, Thread cluster memory 
scheduling: Exploiting differences in memory access behavior, in: ACM/IEEE 43rd 
Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2010, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/MICRO.2010.51.
[29] L. Subramanian, D. Lee, V. Seshadri, H. Rastogi, O. Mutlu, The blacklisting 
memory scheduler: Achieving high performance and fairness at low cost, in: 
IEEE 32nd International Conference on Computer Design, ICCD, 2014, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCD.2014.6974655.
[30] O. Mutlu, T. Moscibroda, Parallelism-aware batch scheduling enabling high
performance, fair shared memory controllers, IEEE Micro 29 (1) (2009) http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/1394608.138212.
[31] Y. Kim, D. Han, O. Mutlu, M. Harchol-Balter, ATLAS: A scalable and 
high-performance scheduling algorithm for multiple memory controllers, in: 
ACM/IEEE 16th International Symposium on High-Performance Computer 
Architecture, HPCA, 2010, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2010.5416658.
[32] L. Subramanian, V. Seshadri, Y. Kim, B. Jaiyen, O. Mutlu, MISE: Providing per
formance predictability and improving fairness in shared main memory systems, 
in: ACM/IEEE 19th International Symposium on High Performance Computer 
Architecture, HPCA, 2013, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HPCA.2013.6522356.
[33] H. Usui, L. Subramanian, K.K.-W. Chang, O. Mutlu, DASH: Deadline-aware 
high-performance memory scheduler for heterogeneous systems with hardware 
accelerators, ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim. (TACO) (2016) http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/2847255.
[34] E. Ipek, O. Mutlu, J.F. Martínez, R. Caruana, Self-optimizing memory controllers: 
Areinforcement learning approach, in: ACM/IEEE International Symposium on 
Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2008, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2008.21.
[35] N. Vijaykumar, A. Jain, D. Majumdar, K. Hsieh, G. Pekhimenko, E. Ebrahimi, 
N. Hajinazar, P.B. Gibbons, O. Mutlu, A case for richer cross-layer abstractions: 
Bridging the semantic gap with expressive memory, in: ACM/IEEE 45th Annual 
International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2018, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/ISCA.2018.00027.
22 
A.M. Abotaleb et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 177 (2026) 103832 
[36] N. Vijaykumar, A. Olgun, K. Kanellopoulos, F.N. Bostanci, H. Hassan, M. Lotfi, 
P.B. Gibbons, O. Mutlu, MetaSys: A practical open-source metadata management 
system to implement and evaluate cross-layer optimizations, ACM Trans. Archit. 
Code Optim. (TACO) (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3505250.
[37] A. Abotaleb, M. Goudarzi, T. Czajkowski, R. Azimi, M. Hassan, Stream-aware 
intelligent memory controller through HW/SW co-design, in: Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on Memory Systems, MEMSYS ’25, (16) NY, USA, 2025, 
pp. 121–136, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3767110.3767122, MEMSYS ’25.
[38] L.-N. Pouchet, T. Yuki, PolyBench/C 4.2.1, 2016, [Online (Accessed 01 July 
2023)]. http://polybench.sourceforge.net/.
[39] S. Che, M. Boyer, J. Meng, D. Tarjan, J.W. Sheaffer, S.-H. Lee, K. Skadron, 
Rodinia: A benchmark suite for heterogeneous computing, in: IEEE International 
Symposium on Workload Characterization, IISWC, 2009, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/IISWC.2009.5306797.
[40] J. Dongarra, M. Heroux, P. Luszczek, A new metric for ranking high performance 
computing systems, Natl. Sci. Rev. 3 (01) (2016) http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nsr/
nwv084.
[41] J.A. Stratton, C.I. Rodrigues, I.-J. Sung, N. Obeid, L.-W. Chang, N. Anssari, G. 
Liu, W. mei W. Hwu, Parboil: A revised benchmark suite for scientific and 
commercial throughput computing, 2012, URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:497928.
[42] J.M. Dodd, Adaptive Page Management, Google Patents, 2006, US Patent 7, 076, 
617 B2.
[43] R. Gill, Everything you always wanted to know about SDRAM (memory): But 
were afraid to ask, 2010, URL https://www.cnblogs.com/tcicy/p/10094580.html. 
(Accessed 28 October 2025).
[44] Intel xeon processor X5650 12M cache 2.66 GHz 6.40 GTs intel QPI product 
specifications, 2010, URL https://shorturl.at/zLzkM.
[45] M. Hassan, A.M. Kaushik, H. Patel, Reverse-engineering embedded memory 
controllers through latency-based analysis, in: ACM/IEEE 21st Real-Time and 
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium, RTAS, 2015, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/RTAS.2015.7108453.
[46] M. Hassan, A.M. Kaushik, H. Patel, Exposing implementation details of embedded 
DRAM memory controllers through latency-based analysis, ACM Trans. Embed. 
Comput. Syst. (TECS) 17 (5) (2018) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3274281.
[47] M. Ghasempour, A. Jaleel, J.D. Garside, M. Luján, HAPPY: Hybrid address
based page policy in DRAMs, in: ACM/IEEE 2nd International Symposium on 
Memory Systems, MEMSYS ’16, NY, USA, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
2989081.2989101, MEMSYS ’16.
[48] Z. Wang, T. Nowatzki, Stream-based memory access specialization for gen
eral purpose processors, in: Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium 
on Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2019, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3307650.
3322229.
[49] X. Yu, C.J. Hughes, N. Satish, S. Devadas, IMP: Indirect memory prefetcher, in: 
ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO, 
2015, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2830772.2830807.
[50] T. Nowatzki, V. Gangadhar, N. Ardalani, K. Sankaralingam, Stream-dataflow ac
celeration, in: 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 
ISCA, 2017, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3079856.3080255.
[51] G. Rao, J. Chen, J. Yik, X. Qian, Sparsecore: stream isa and processor 
specialization for sparse computation, in: 27th ACM International Conference 
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, 
ASPLOS, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3503222.3507705.
[52] A.S. Molyakov, Secured supercomputer technologies in Russia: Functional com
puting units based on multithread-stream cores with specialized accelerators, 
in: 7th International Congress on Information and Communication Technology, 
ICICT, Springer, 2022.
[53] A. Waterman, K. Asanovi, J. Hauser, The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume 
II: Privileged Architecture, 20211203 ed., RISC-V International, 2021.
[54] C.H. Park, S. Cha, B. Kim, Y. Kwon, D. Black-Schaffer, J. Huh, Perforated 
page: Supporting fragmented memory allocation for large pages, in: ACM/IEEE 
47th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA, 2020, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA45697.2020.00079.
[55] R.D. Kadhao, R.K. Siddharth, Y.B. Nithin Kumar, M.H. Vasantha, D. Dwivedi, 
A2.5 GHz, 1-Kb SRAM with auxiliary circuit assisted sense amplifier in 65
nm CMOS process, in: 36th International Conference on VLSI Design and 22nd 
International Conference on Embedded Systems, VLSID, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/VLSID57277.2023.00036.
[56] N. Binkert, B. Beckmann, G. Black, S.K. Reinhardt, A. Saidi, A. Basu, J. Hestness, 
D.R. Hower, T. Krishna, S. Sardashti, et al., The gem5 simulator, ACM SIGARCH 
Comp. Arch. News 39 (2) (2011).
[57] A. Pellegrini, Arm neoverse N2: Arm’s 2nd generation high performance in
frastructure CPUs and system IPs, in: IEEE Hot Chips 33 Symposium, 2021, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HCS52781.2021.9567483.
[58] P. Esmaili-Dokht, F. Sgherzi, V.S. Girelli, I. Boixaderas, M. Carmin, A. Monemi, 
A. Armejach, E. Mercadal, G. Llort, P. Radojković, M. Moreto, J. Giménez, 
X. Martorell, E. Ayguadé, J. Labarta, E. Confalonieri, R. Dubey, J. Adlard, A 
mess of memory system benchmarking, simulation and application profiling, in: 
ACM/IEEE 57th International Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO, 2024, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MICRO61859.2024.00020.
[59] O. Mutlu, T. Moscibroda, Parallelism-aware batch-scheduling: Enhancing both 
performance and fairness of shared DRAM systems, in: ACM/IEEE 35th Inter
national Symposium on Computer Architecture, thirty fifth ed., ISCA, 2008, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2008.7.
[60] P. Michaud, Best-offset hardware prefetching, in: ACM/IEEE International Sym
posium on High-Performance Computer Architecture, HPCA, 2016, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/HPCA.2016.7446087.
[61] V. Young, A. Krishna, Towards bandwidth-efficient prefetching with slim ampm, 
The 2nd Data Prefetching Championship, DPC-2 Workshop in ISCA 2015, 2015.
[62] J. Kim, S.H. Pugsley, P.V. Gratz, A.N. Reddy, C. Wilkerson, Z. Chishti, Path 
confidence based lookahead prefetching, in: ACM/IEEE 49th Annual International 
Symposium on Microarchitecture, MICRO, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
MICRO.2016.7783763.
[63] A. Petitet, R. Whaley, J. Dongarra, A. Cleary, HPL 2.0 – a portable imple
mentation of the high-performance linpack benchmark for distributed-memory 
computers, 2008.
[64] E. Anderson, et al., LAPACK (linear algebra package) users’ guide, 1999, https:
//www.netlib.org/lapack/. (Accessed 11 July 2025).
[65] K. Chandrasekar, C. Weis, Y. Li, Goossens, K. Goossens, DRAMPower: Open
source DRAM power & energy estimation tool, 2025, (Accessed 14 July 2025). 
http://www.drampower.info.
[66] A.M. Abotaleb, M. Hassan, The case for HW/SW harmony in real-time systems: 
Tightening memory latency of streaming applications, ACM Trans. Embed. 
Comput. Syst. (2025) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3762647.
[67] K. Asifuzzaman, M. Abuelala, M. Hassan, F.J. Cazorla, Demystifying the charac
teristics of high bandwidth memory for real-time systems, in: 2021 IEEE/ACM 
International Conference on Computer Aided Design, ICCAD, 2021, pp. 1–9, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD51958.2021.9643473.
[68] A. Olgun, M. Osseiran, A.G. Yağlıkçı, Y.C. Tuğrul, H. Luo, S. Rhyner, B. Salami, 
J.G. Luna, O. Mutlu, Read disturbance in high bandwidth memory: A detailed 
experimental study on HBM2 DRAM chips, in: 2024 54th Annual IEEE/IFIP 
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN, 2024, pp. 
75–89, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DSN58291.2024.00022.
[69] T. Glint, M. Awasthi, J. Mekie, Hardware-software co-design of a collaborative 
DNN accelerator for 3D stacked memories with multi-channel data, in: 2024 
29th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, ASP-DAC, 2024, pp. 
454–459, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ASP-DAC58780.2024.10473935.
[70] B.C. Schwedock, P. Yoovidhya, J. Seibert, N. Beckmann, Täk¯o: A polymor
phic cache hierarchy for general-purpose optimization of data movement, in: 
ACM/IEEE 49th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, 
ISCA, NY, USA, 2022, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3470496.3527379.
[71] O. Mutlu, Intelligent architectures for intelligent computing systems, in: Design, 
Automation and Test in Europe Conference, DATE, 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.
23919/DATE51398.2021.9474073.
[72] O. Mutlu, T. Moscibroda, Stall-time fair memory access scheduling for chip multi
processors, in: ACM 40th Annual International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 
MICRO, 2007, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2007.21.
[73] R. Ausavarungnirun, K.K.-W. Chang, L. Subramanian, G.H. Loh, O. Mutlu, Staged 
memory scheduling: Achieving high performance and scalability in heteroge
neous systems, in: ACM/IEEE 39th Annual International Symposium on Comp