Checkpointing and state transfer for industrial controller redundancy
Bjarne Johanssona,b
,∗, Björn Leandera,b, Olof Holmgrena, Thomas Nolteb,
Alessandro V. Papadopoulosb
a ABB Process Automation, Process Control Platform, Västerås, Sweden
b Mälardalen University, Västerås, Sweden
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Checkpointing
Fault tolerance
Communication
Industrial control systems
Redundancy
Reliability
State transfer
A B S T R A C T
Industrial controllers are moving from controller-centric to network-centric architectures, where lightweight 
containerization is increasingly adopted in operational technology. Many industrial domains require high 
reliability, often achieved through spatial standby redundancy with duplicated controllers where one is the 
active primary and the other a standby backup. In such setups, the standby backup must seamlessly take 
over control when the primary fails. Hence, the backup needs to be up-to-date with respect to the primary’s 
internal state. The retrieval of internal states is commonly known as checkpointing. We review checkpointing 
approaches used in virtualized and industrial settings and derive a set of desired features for state-transfer 
protocols. We then assess existing communication protocols against these features and experimentally evaluate 
the two strongest contenders under no-loss and packet-loss conditions, measuring recovery performance. The 
analysis reveals that none of the protocols assessed meets all the desired features. To address this gap, we 
introduce a new state-transfer protocol that satisfies all identified features. In experiments, it demonstrates 
good performance under packet loss, with only a slight reduction in throughput compared to the identified 
top contender protocols that we used for comparison.
1. Introduction
Industrial Control Systems (ICS) are undergoing an architectural 
shift from controller-centric to network-centric architectures, in which 
the network replaces the controller as the system’s center [1]. This 
transition aims to improve interoperability and flexibility, particularly 
to support data propagation to AI-driven forecasting and decision
making systems. Standards play a central role in enabling inter-vendor 
interoperability; within ICS, Open Platform Communications Unified 
Architecture (OPC UA) is widely regarded as a key facilitating stan
dard [2].
The network-centric architectures enable flexible controller deploy
ment and increase Information Technology (IT) interest in Opera
tional Technology (OT) domains [3–5]. Lightweight virtualization tech
nologies, such as containerization and orchestration, are noted exam
ples [6–8]. Containerized, hardware-agnostic controllers further ex
pand deployment options, particularly when not reliant on specialized 
fieldbuses [5,6].
ICS provides automation across diverse domains where unplanned 
downtime is unacceptable and, in some cases, hazardous. Consequently, 
maintaining a low failure probability is fundamental, motivating the 
use of fault-tolerance techniques. A conventional approach is to use 
redundancy through the duplication of critical components, such as 
controllers and network paths, to eliminate single points of failure [9]. 
In ICS, spatial standby redundancy with duplicated controllers is com
mon: one controller operates as the active primary, while another 
serves as a standby backup [10,11]. This passive standby redundancy 
masks primary failures from field devices, with the backup seamlessly 
assuming control upon failure [9].
To enable failover, mechanisms for failure detection and state repli
cation are required [12,13]. Failure detection identifies primary con
troller faults, while state replication ensures the backup possesses the 
internal state necessary to transparently continue control of the field 
devices and the underlying process.
Checkpointing collects internal states and is therefore a prereq
uisite for state replication. Driven by network-centric transformation 
and lightweight virtualization, controller software, including redun
dancy mechanisms such as state replication, is increasingly hardware
agnostic [14]. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, and as highlighted 
This work is funded by The Knowledge Foundation (KKS) via the SEINE, ARRAY, and MARC projects, by the Swedish Research Council (VR), and project 
PSI.
∗ Corresponding author at: ABB Process Automation, Process Control Platform, Västerås, Sweden.
E-mail address: bjarne.johansson@se.abb.com (B. Johansson).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2026.103872
Received 11 September 2025; Received in revised form 20 May 2026; Accepted 28 May 2026
Available online 6 June 2026 
1383-7621/© 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 1. Overview of the paper’s sections and the five-step workflow (Step I–V). 
by the literature survey included in this work, existing solutions are 
ill-suited for controller redundancy, for example due to the lack of 
schedulability for concurrent state transfers. This work focuses on the 
transfer of checkpoint data and proposes a novel channel-based ap
proach with a retransmission budget to enable the predictable, reliable, 
and schedulable transfer of the internal states of concurrent control 
applications over a single switched Ethernet network, thereby avoiding 
dependence on less widespread communication technologies. Further, 
as Hallmans et al. point out, new technology can pose maintenance 
challenges if adopted too early [15].
The paper includes a literature survey that maps related work to 
highlight the lack of suitable existing solutions and thereby moti
vates the proposed approach. The work follows a structured five-step 
workflow, illustrated in Fig.  1, with each step concluding in a brief 
contribution summary. Individual steps may be read independently, 
such as the proposed solution in Section 7.
Step I presents a literature search and summary covering checkpo
inting/state-transfer work in industrial controller redundancy and in 
container/orchestration contexts.1
Step II defines desired features for state transfer and compares 
candidate communication protocols against these features.
Step III presents and performs an experimental evaluation of two 
protocols with the highest feature coverage.
Step IV presents a protocol conceived for state transfer, together 
with its design.
1 This is a targeted literature scan to identify relevant mechanisms and 
technologies for our use case; it is not a systematic literature review.
Step V presents the implementation and integration on VxWorks, a 
real-time operating system (RTOS) [16], and the experimental results.
The contributions of the paper are:
C 1: Literature search and summary: a concise overview of check
pointing/state-transfer approaches in industrial redundancy and 
container/orchestration contexts.
C 2: Protocol feature matching: identification of desired features 
for communication protocols used for state transfer, and match
ing these features against selected protocols, where the main 
emphasis is to identify protocols suitable for state transfer in the 
industrial controller redundancy use case.
C 3: Experimental evaluation: experimental evaluation of the two 
best-matching protocols on VxWorks under loss-free and lossy 
conditions.
C 4: State-transfer protocol: design and integration of a state-transfer 
protocol, experimentally evaluated on VxWorks (including multi
application mimicking workloads) and compared to the two 
best-matching protocols; it exceeds them under loss and supports 
transmission scheduling to facilitate deadline-driven prioritiza
tion.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces industrial 
controllers, the execution model, fault tolerance, and container or
chestration, and Section 3 provide related work. Section 4 (Step I) 
details the checkpointing literature search and summarizes the results. 
Section 5 (Step II) defines desired features for state-transfer protocols, 
introduces candidate protocols, and assesses them against these fea
tures. Section 6 (Step III) experimentally evaluates the top candidates 
2 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 2. Controllers, field devices, and upper layers of the automation pyramid in a controller-centric architecture and a network-centric architecture.
and reports results. Section 7 (Step IV) presents the proposed proto
col, and Section 8 (Step V) evaluates it. Section 9 concludes. Fig.  1 
illustrates the paper structure.
2. Background
This work addresses challenges related to the fault tolerance of 
industrial controllers. Hence, this section first introduces ICS and their 
execution models, then introduces fault-tolerance concepts, and finally, 
briefly introduces orchestration and containers.
2.1. Industrial controllers
Industrial controllers are rugged computers designed for longevity 
in potentially harsh environments. The controller executes the control 
logic to drive the process to the desired state by reading and writ
ing values to and from field devices that interface with the physical 
world. Distributed Control Systems (DCS) are large-scale automation 
systems comprising interconnected controllers that communicate with 
each other and field devices to automate an entire site, rather than 
just a single machine. A Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) is an
other well-known term for industrial-grade controllers, often featuring 
built-in Input/Output (I/O) interfaces.
Fig.  2a shows the traditional hierarchical controller-centric archi
tecture, where field devices at the bottom of the figure connect to 
only one controller, commonly over dedicated fieldbuses [17]. Above 
the controllers are the high-level systems, such as Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA), which provide operator control and 
overview with fewer real-time requirements and more reliance on IT 
systems. Fig.  2(b) shows the flattened network-centric architecture, 
with all system parts connected to a communication backbone, denoted 
as the O-PAS Connectivity Framework (OCF) by the Open Process 
AutomationTM Standard (O-PAS) [18]. O-PAS refers to controllers as 
Distributed Control Nodes (DCNs); we use the terms controller and DCN
interchangeably.
As mentioned, the DCN runs the control logic that strives to drive 
the controlled process to the desired state by getting and providing 
input and output to field devices. The following section introduces the 
DCN execution model.
2.2. Execution model
The control logic that executes on the controller is a program, also 
referred to as an application, typically developed in an engineering tool 
provided by the DCN manufacturer. The engineering tool enables users 
to program and develop applications for specific domains and down
load them to the DCN. The predominant standard for programming 
DCN applications is IEC 61131–3, and the execution model is cyclic 
as shown in Fig.  3 [19,20].
As shown in Fig.  3, the execution phase consists of four phases: 
(i) Copy-in (𝐶𝐼), (ii) Execute (𝐸𝑥𝑒), (iii) Replicate State (𝑅𝑆), and (iv)
Copy-out (𝐶𝑂). Copy-in is the phase where updated values from the 
field device are made available to the application. These are the values 
the application uses when executing the control logic in the Execute
phase. The Execute phase updates the internal states of the application, 
i.e., variables are updated. The updated state needs to be replicated to 
the backup in case of redundancy. This replication takes place in the
Replicate State phase. Lastly, the updated values are communicated to 
the connected field devices, which occurs in phase Copy-out.
A controller typically executes a set of control applications, denoted 
as 𝐴, where each application 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 has a period 𝑃𝑎. Within each period 
 
 𝑎, the application 𝑎 executes all its phases: 𝐶𝐼𝑎, 𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑎, 𝑅𝑆𝑎, and 𝐶𝑂𝑎. 
Specifically, application 𝑎 must complete all phases included in the 
Execution Phase (𝐸𝑃) tuple ⟨𝐶𝐼𝑎,𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑎,𝑅𝑆𝑎,𝐶𝑂𝑎⟩ during each period. 
Koziolek et al. define the application slack time as the interval from 
when application 𝑎 completes its 𝐶𝑂𝑎
 phase to its next invocation in 
the subsequent period [21]. Fig.  4 illustrates the application phases and 
the phases’ dependency on input data and internal state from earlier 
periods. Fig.  4 also shows the output from the different phases.
𝐼𝑎,𝑛
 represents the set of input values from 𝐶𝐼 at period instance 
 
  for application 𝑎. 𝑆𝑎,𝑛−1
 represents the internal state at the start of 
execution for application 𝑎 in period 𝑛, while 𝑆𝑎,𝑛
 is the new internal 
state after execution 𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑎,𝑛. This new state (𝑆𝑎,𝑛) is replicated to the 
backup and used as the internal state for 𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑎,𝑛+1
 in period 𝑃𝑎,𝑛+1. 
Lastly, 𝑂𝑎,𝑛
 represents the externally visible output from the execution 
of application 𝑎 in period 𝑃𝑎,𝑛.
𝑂𝑎,𝑛
 depends on 𝐼𝑎,𝑛, 𝑆𝑎,𝑛−1, and the execution 𝐸𝑥𝑒𝑎,𝑛. Therefore, 
to avoid producing historically outdated values during a failover, any 
failover occurring after the output 𝑂𝑎,𝑛
 must result in outputs that are 
 
 𝑎,𝑛
 or later for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴. Consequently, once the primary outputs 𝑂𝑎,𝑛, 
the backup must hold an internal state 𝑆𝑎,𝑛−1
 or later. This implies that, 
upon the primary’s output of 𝑂𝑎,𝑛, state 𝑆𝑎,𝑛−2
 (and older) are outdated. 
Fig.  5 illustrates state aging on a backup for application 𝑎.
Note that the application state for application 𝑎 is utilized by 𝑎 only; 
hence, a failed state transfer does not directly impact any other appli
cation than 𝑎. Inter-application communication between applications is 
handled in a similar way as application and field device communica
tion, rather than multiple applications being directly dependent on the 
same state data.
2.3. Fault tolerance
Fault tolerance aims to ensure continued operation despite faults. 
Spatial standby redundancy is a fault-tolerance pattern commonly used 
in ICS [11]. In such systems, state replication enables one active unit 
and one or more backups to take over upon failure [12]. We assume 
fail-silent semantics, where a failing primary ceases output [22]. The 
backup typically supervises the primary using periodic heartbeats and 
interprets their absence as a failure [23,24]. Additional mechanisms 
such as self-tests, diagnostics, and cross-comparison further strengthen 
fail-silent behavior in industrial control systems [25]. Failure detection 
3 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 3. Controller application execution sequence.
Fig. 4. Internal state and application execution phases dependency and relation.
Fig. 5. Output to field devices and state and aging on the backup.
itself is out of scope, and other failure semantics, such as Byzantine 
faults, are not considered [26].
Spatial standby redundancy with hardware duplication addresses 
persistent hardware failures and relies on failure detection to trigger 
failover. From the field devices’ perspective, this constitutes passive 
redundancy, where the backup transparently assumes control when the 
primary fails [9].
Standby readiness is classified as cold, warm, or hot [9]. Cold 
standby denotes an unpowered spare replaced manually. Warm standby 
does not execute control applications but can rapidly resume them 
upon takeover, whereas hot standby executes the applications without 
producing field outputs. This work targets warm and hot standby 
redundancy.
Retrieving application state for recovery is commonly referred to 
as checkpointing [20]. An alternative is active replication using de
terministic Replicated State Machines (RSM), where state progression 
events are transferred instead of internal states [27]. Such approaches 
rely on consensus protocols, e.g., Paxos or Raft [28,29]. This work 
focuses on passive replication, where internal states are checkpointed 
and transferred rather than events.
2.4. Orchestration and containers
Containers are an OS-level virtualization technique providing soft
ware bundling and resource isolation with low overhead [8]. The per
formant nature of containers and their deployment flexibility make con
tainers interesting in the ICS context [6]. Docker is one of the most well
known container solutions [30,31]. Docker has experimental support 
for checkpointing using Checkpoint/Restore In Userspace (CRIU) [32]. 
CRIU is a Linux software for checkpointing to disk [33].
Orchestration is a term commonly associated with the automated 
management of containers. For example, cloud service providers utilize 
a combination of containers and orchestration for elasticity, i.e., scaling 
resources to match current needs and handling failures [34]. Kuber
netes (K8s) is one of the most well-known container orchestration 
systems [35].
3. Related work
One of the goals of this work is to explore existing research on state 
replication in the ICS context, with a focus on the mechanisms used for 
transferring state data. Table  2 lists the identified publications.
Of these works, only a few address redundancy directly. Stattel
mann et al. evaluate different checkpointing approaches to reduce 
4 
B. Johansson et al.
data size but do not discuss the protocols used for transferring state 
data [20]. Stój proposes a state-machine-based hot-standby solution 
using a non-redundant controller [36], and Zhao et al. describe a redun
dant architecture [37]. Hegazy et al. present automation-as-a-service 
with redundancy [3], and Goldschmidt et al. present a container-based 
architecture that briefly touches on redundancy [6]. Since security is 
fundamental for ICS, Ma et al. discuss security challenges in redundant 
controller architectures [38]. These works cover controller redundancy 
to varying degrees, but none dive deep into state transfer mechanisms.
Johansson et al. propose a distributed architecture to avoid over
loading a backup that serves multiple primaries with state data [39]. 
However, they do not evaluate the performance of the underlying state 
transfer protocol. Bakhshi et al. propose an architecture for persistent, 
fault-tolerant state storage for stateful containers in the context of 
industrial robotics [40]. They use distributed storage and Raft for con
sistency, but do not evaluate the performance of the underlying state 
transfer protocol. Nouruzi et al. also focus on mobile industrial robotics 
and propose an architecture with redundant navigation modules, but do 
not detail the state replication mechanisms [41].
Another goal of this work is to study checkpointing and state 
replication mechanisms used in containerized applications, focusing 
on the mechanisms used to transfer state data to learn if the found 
approaches suit our redundancy use case. Table  4 summarizes the 
findings, i.e., related work concerning checkpointing in a containerized 
context.
Koziolek et al. address state transfer in the ICS context between 
Kubernetes-managed containers, aiming to allow software upgrades 
without interrupting the control application [21]. The interruption
free upgrade is enabled by transferring internal states from the old 
version to the container running the new version. They utilize OPC UA 
Client–Server for state transfer, achieving relatively good performance. 
However, the suitability of OPC UA Client–Server as a state replication 
protocol for redundancy use cases is not discussed.
Johansson et al. utilize Kubernetes to manage redundant, container
ized DCNs. When a failure occurs, Kubernetes automatically restores 
redundancy and mitigates service degradation [5]. However, they do 
not detail the mechanisms used for state transfer between the re
dundant controllers. Leander et al. present a security analysis of a 
communication link used for standby redundancy purposes [42].
None of the studies above propose concrete solutions for trans
ferring checkpointed state data. In contrast, our work explores the 
checkpointing and redundancy literature to determine the suitability 
of existing protocols for controller redundancy. We then identify a set 
of desired features for state-transfer protocols in redundancy scenarios 
and evaluate a selection of candidate protocols against these criteria. 
Finally, we experimentally assess the most promising protocols and 
introduce our own solution, which fulfills all desired features and is 
likewise evaluated through experimentation.
4. Checkpointing in the literature
To assess checkpointing solutions described in the literature and 
their applicability to our redundancy use case, we conducted a liter
ature search. The following subsections present the results.
4.1. Checkpointing for controller redundancy
To identify work addressing checkpointing in the context of indus
trial controller redundancy, we searched Web of Science and Scopus for 
redundancy-related publications focusing on checkpointing and state 
replication in industrial controllers, using the query shown in Table 
1. Reference tracing was used to broaden the search, and relevant 
publications were compiled in Table  2. The table summarizes each 
work’s main focus and the extent to which it addresses redundancy, 
checkpointing, and transfer mechanisms. As shown in Table  2, most 
publications do not discuss checkpointing or state transfer; those that 
do are further summarized in Section 4.1.1.
Table 1
Controller redundancy checkpointing literature query.
 (‘‘controller’’ OR ‘‘PLC’’) AND ‘‘redundan*’’ AND (‘‘state’’ 
OR ‘‘checkpoint*’’)
Table 2
Overview of publications related to checkpointing in industrial controller 
redundancy context.
 Ref. Topic Redundancy Checkpoint Transfer 
 Directly identified from literature search
 [43] Safety  [44] Deployment  [45] Simulation  [46] Security  [47] Time sync.  [20] Data reduction  [38] Security  [36] Cost-eff. red.  [41] Cloud-hosted ctrl.  [48] Deployment  [39] State transfer  [49] System red. 
 Indirectly identified via reference tracking
 [37] System red.  [50] Security  [51] App. upgrade  [6] Architecture  [3] Cloud-hosted ctrl.  [5] Orch. red. ctrl  [52] Cloud-hosted ctrl.  [53] Migration  [54] Live migration  [55] Architecture  [56] Architecture  [57] Recovery time  [14] State transfer 
 Legend:  Detailed,  Mentioned (no technical details),  Not mentioned
4.1.1. Summary of identified papers
Several works discuss redundancy in industrial controllers while 
providing limited detail on checkpointing or state transfer. Stattelmann 
et al. present a compiler-aided checkpointing mechanism in which data 
changed since the last checkpoint is stored in a buffer for transfer to 
a backup [20], but the transfer mechanism itself is not described. Ma 
et al. analyze the vulnerability of redundant controller constellations 
to cyber attacks [38] and argue that redundancy increases the attack 
surface, yet they do not specify how checkpoint data is transferred. 
Stój proposes a cost-effective redundancy approach using a PLC pair 
but does not address checkpointing or state transfer [36].
A second group of studies considers distributed or cloud-based re
dundancy, where state replication is assumed but not detailed. Nouruzi
Pur et al. design a cloud-hosted redundant controller for mobile robots, 
assigning the robot responsibility for replicating state between redun
dant servers [41], but the replication mechanism is not specified. 
Johansson et al. address network congestion when one controller backs 
up multiple primaries [39]. To mitigate congestion, checkpointed state 
data is transferred to a node other than the primary, using a UDP-based 
protocol whose details are not provided.
The following works were identified through reference tracking and 
describe redundancy architectures without addressing checkpointing or 
state handling. Zhao et al. present a system with redundant networks 
and devices [37], while Luo et al. describe a hot standby solution using 
a quad-PLC architecture [50]; neither discusses checkpointing or state 
transfer.
Another line of work focuses on application updates or controller 
architectures where state transfer is secondary. Wahler et al. propose a 
method for bumpless application updates in which ‘‘Teacher’’ objects 
transfer state to ‘‘Learner’’ objects on another node [51], but the 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
5 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 3
Checkpointing in container and orchestration context literature query.
 (‘‘checkpoint*’’ OR ‘‘replicat*’’ OR ‘‘restore’’) AND (‘‘ku
bernetes’’ OR ‘‘k8s’’ OR ‘‘k3s’’ OR ‘‘orchestrat*’’ OR ‘‘con
tainer*’’) 
underlying transfer mechanism is not specified. Hegazy et al. host 
controller applications in the cloud and store state on the device to 
enable redundancy [3]. Although TCP and Modbus TCP are used, their 
suitability for state transfer is not evaluated. Goldschmidt et al. identify 
redundancy as an important use case in a containerized controller 
architecture but do not detail checkpointing or state transfer [6].
Several studies investigate orchestration-based or geographically 
distributed redundancy but provide little insight into checkpointing 
or transfer mechanisms. Johansson et al. examine Kubernetes-based 
orchestration as an alternative to traditional warm standby redun
dancy [5], mentioning a proprietary checkpointing mechanism without 
further detail. Kaneko et al. propose geographically distributed redun
dancy across multiple data centers [52], but do not discuss checkpoint
ing or state transfer.
Live migration approaches implicitly rely on continuous state trans
fer but often omit protocol-level details. Gundall et al. propose a 
live migration method in which state data is continuously sent from 
the source to the destination until the remaining difference is small 
enough to trigger handover [53]. However, the transfer protocol is not 
described.
Some works fall outside the scope of checkpoint-based redundancy. 
Grüner et al. and Vogt et al. present flexible controller architectures 
without discussing redundancy, checkpointing, or state transfer [55,
56]. Barletta et al. analyze recovery times of stateless applications in 
Kubernetes [57], which do not require checkpointing or state transfer.
A small number of studies consider migration-time buffering to 
reduce downtime. Govindaraj et al. store incoming requests at the 
destination server while checkpointed data is transferred [54], but the 
transfer mechanism itself is not specified.
Only a few works explicitly evaluate state transfer mechanisms at 
the protocol level. Kampa et al. investigate Remote Direct Memory 
Access (RDMA) for transferring state between two virtualized PLCs in a 
redundant deployment [14]. They replace the original TCP/UDP-based 
transfer used by CODESYS with RDMA [14,58], achieving significantly 
improved performance. The measured average transfer time of 1 MB 
using TCP/UDP is 295 ms over dual 25 Gbps links, compared to a 
theoretical minimum of approximately 8 ms over a single 1 Gbps link. 
This discrepancy is not discussed, nor is the limitation that CODESYS 
supports synchronization from only a single task [14,58].
As summarized in Table  2, relatively few works address check
pointing in the context of industrial controller redundancy. While 
fifteen publications discuss redundancy, only five describe checkpoint
ing mechanisms, and only Hegazy et al. [3] and Kampa et al. [14] 
specify state transfer down to the transport protocol level.
4.2. Containers and checkpointing
Inspired by the growing adoption of containers and orchestration 
in industrial control systems and real-time systems in general, we 
search for checkpointing mechanisms in the context of containers and 
orchestration [5,6,54,57]. We search Scopus and Web of Science using 
the query in Table  3.
Since the search aims to determine whether recent technologies 
and solutions in the container context can be used for or inspire 
checkpointing mechanisms in an industrial controller redundancy use 
case, we limit the search to publications from 2018 to 2024, the year 
of writing this section.
Table  4 presents the result of the search, gives an overview of 
the relevant literature, and highlights the main topic of each publica
tion, the method used for checkpointing, the transfer mechanism, and 
Table 4
Overview of container checkpointing publications.
 Ref. Topic Method Transfer Real-time 
 [59] Migration CRIU FTP, SSH  [60] Fault tolerance CRIU FTP  [61] Migration CRIU SCP  [62] Migration CRIU SCP  [63] Migration CRIU rsync V2I  [64] Migration CRIU rsync  [65] Migration CRIU rsync  [66] Migration CRIU NFS  [67] Migration CRIU NFS  [68] Migration CRIU SR-IOV NFS  [69] Migration CRIU ZFS  [70] Fault tolerance CRIU DRBD  [71] Fault tolerance CRIU  [72] Contention CRIU MOSIX (TCP)  [73] Migration CRIU  [74] Fault tolerance CRIU File share  [75] Migration CRIU  [76] Migration CRIU  [77] Migration CRIU  [78] Utilization CRIU  [79] DB persistence CRIU No transfer  [80] Migration CRIU  [81] Migration CRIU  [82] Migration CRIU  [83] Migration CRIU  [84] Migration CRIU  [85] Fault tolerance CRIU  [86] Forensics CRIU No transfer  [87] Fault tolerance CRIU  [88] Fault tolerance CRIU  [89] Recovery time Custom K8s service HTTP  [90] Recovery time Custom K8s service HTTP  [91] Fault tolerance Key–value store NFS  [7] App. upgrade Custom OPC UA CS ICS  [92] Fault tolerance Incremental  [93] Contention CRIU No transfer  [94] Migration Custom (CRIU)  [95] Contention CRIU  [96] Migration File replication  [97] Fault tolerance Custom No transfer  [98] Fault tolerance Custom  [99] Fault tolerance Custom No transfer  [100] Storage Custom  [101] Fault tolerance Custom  [102] Storage DB, etcd ICS  [103] Fault tolerance Custom Raft Robotics  [104] Fault tolerance Custom Raft  [105] Fault tolerance Apache Kafka 
 Legend:  Mentioned (no technical details),  Not mentioned
whether the work targets a real-time-dependent solution. The following 
section, Section 4.2.1, gives a summary of the found publications.
4.2.1. Summary of identified papers
As seen in Table  4, CRIU is the dominant solution for checkpointing. 
When it comes to transfer mechanisms, there is no dominant solution. 
We group the found literature into the following categories: (i) CRIU 
with Transfer Details, (ii) CRIU without Transfer Details, (iii) Custom 
Solution with Transfer Details, (iv) Custom Solution without Transfer 
Details, and (v) Consensus Protocol-based Solutions.
CRIU with Transfer Details: These works utilize CRIU and describe 
the transfer mechanism. Starting with the work that uses a file transfer 
protocol. Afshari et al. use CRIU to checkpoint application states and 
compare the performance between File Transfer Protocol (FTP) and 
Secure Shell (SSH) when transferring the checkpointed file to the 
destination node [59]. FTP is quicker, and the transfer times are within 
the second range for the smallest checkpointed data. FTP is also used 
by Droob et al. who optimize the number of checkpoints to minimize 
the performance impact of the checkpointed service while providing 
fault tolerance [60]. Pu et al. migrate applications if they believe the 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
6 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Quality of Service (QoS) will improve by doing so; they use Secure Copy 
Protocol (SCP), which utilizes SSH [61].
Chebaane et al. use CRIU checkpointing and Remote Sync (rsync) 
to offload critical tasks from the device to fog or edge, in a Vehicle-to
Infrastructure (V2I) use case [63]. They use rsync to transfer the check
pointed file. Qiu et al. use rsync on top of Multipath TCP (MPTCP) [64]. 
MPTCP is a protocol that provides multihoming TCP transfer, that is, 
multiple paths between communication endpoints [106]. Guitart et al. 
also move the CRIU checkpoint file using rsync [65].
Widjajarto et al. measure the resource utilization when using CRIU 
for migration [66]. The checkpointed data is copied with a file copy 
using Network File System (NFS). Mangkhangcharoen et al. com
pare CRIU and Distributed MultiThreaded CheckPointing (DMTCP) 
for checkpointing machine learning applications for migration pur
poses [67]. NFS is used to transfer the checkpointed data. Prakash 
et al. use CRIU with single root-input/output virtualization (SR-IOV) to 
reduce the CPU overhead induced by handling virtual networks [68]. 
The checkpointed data are transferred using NFS.
Bhardwaj et al. utilize the distributed file Z File System (ZFS) 
to distribute the checkpointed data [69]. Zhou et al. optimize CRIU 
and use the Distributed Replicated Block Device (DRBD) to replicate 
the checkpointed files [70,71]. Adhipta et al. address shared resource 
contention when checkpointing, since the checkpointing process re
quires processing and storage resources [72]. The file is stored on the 
distributed file system MOSIX [107].
CRIU without Transfer Details: Below are the works that use CRIU 
but do not detail the checkpointed data transfer. Khan et al. use CRIU 
for migration in a V2I use case but do not detail how the data is 
transferred [73]. Müller et al. propose a Kubernetes-based architecture 
for fault tolerance of stateful applications [74]. Checkpointed data is 
stored on persistent storage, but the storage details and the transfer of 
the data to the storage are not detailed.
Ramanathan et al. improve CRIU to handle migration of network 
connections better [75,76]. The actual transfer mechanism of the 
checkpointed state is not described. Ngo et al. propose a delta identifier 
to reduce the data transferred, but the mechanism for the transfer is 
not presented [77]. Karhula et al. use checkpointing in a Function as 
a Server (FaaS) context to save resource utilization by checkpointing 
and suspending the containerized application that provides the function 
while the application is waiting for the next job [78]. Lee et al. use 
CRIU for checkpointing in memory databases [79].
Stoyanov et al. compare different checkpointing methods, and Li 
et al. use CRIU in a Kubernetes context to checkpoint Virtualized 
Network Functions (VNF) for migration [80,81]. Bhardwaj et al. com
pare the checkpointing performance between containers and virtual 
machines [82]. Di et al. develop a tool for migrating containers using 
CRIU [83]. Oh et al. propose a CRIU-based application transparent 
migration [84]. Schmidt et al. introduce a Kubernetes operator for 
transparent checkpointing using CRIU in the Kubernetes context [85]. 
Gharaibeh et al. use checkpointing for forensics purposes, that is, 
troubleshooting or investigating suspected attack attempts [86].
Venâncio et al. use CIRU to checkpoint and go through different 
VNF redundancy deployments [87,88]. Some VNF deployments dis
cussed replicate the checkpointed data to a central database, while 
others use a dedicated state replicator to distribute state data to repli
cas.
None of these works detail the mechanisms used for transferring the 
checkpointed data.
Custom Solution with Transfer Details: The below works are the 
works that define a custom checkpointing solution and also describe 
the transfer mechanism used.
Arif et al. describe a checkpointing solution for FaaS, using a 
key–value storage hosted on an NFS [91].
Koziolek et al. introduce a Kubernetes operator for application 
updates [7]. The updated states are sent from the old version of the 
application to the new version using the OPC UA Client–Server (OPC 
UA CS) protocol. Their work does not target redundancy, but the use 
case is similar; the changed application states are transferred in the 
execution slack between two invocations of the same task.
Vayghan et al. introduce a custom Kubernetes controller for quicker 
failure recovery and a Kubernetes service for state replication between 
the stateful applications over HTTP [89,90].
Custom Solution without Transfer Details: The works listed be
low present customized checkpointing solutions without describing the 
mechanisms used to transfer state data.
Zhang et al. present a custom approach where they incrementally 
store the dirty pages of a Docker container up to a certain threshold, 
where the remaining dirty pages are checkpointed, to reduce the time 
the processes are freezed [92]. Venkatesh et al. propose checkpointing 
to memory instead of disk to boost performance and reduce I/O con
tention from disk accesses [93]. Yu et al. propose a CRIU optimization 
that checkpoints to memory instead of disk. The checkpointed data 
is transferred, but without providing details [94]. Han et al. also ad
dress resource contention when storing checkpointed data by utilizing 
properties provided by the storage, in their case, SSD disk [95].
Junior et al. replicate container file systems between different data 
centers but do not discuss the communication protocol used [96]. 
Stavrinides et al. let each task checkpoint its data, but the data is not 
transferred [97]. Cai et al. replicate to a double buffer; one page of the 
buffer is replicated, while the other is updated by the application [98].
Choi et al. propose a checkpointing solution called iContainer, and 
Luati et al. optimize storage of checkpointed data using a distributed 
storage [99,100]. Behera et al. propose a predictive checkpointing so
lution for High-Performance Computing (HPC) [101]. Jia et al. propose 
a custom mechanism for checkpointing, where the states are replicated 
amongst peers [4]. However, the transfer protocol is not detailed.
Denzler et al. compare different architectures for persistent storage 
for stateful, containerized applications but do not detail the underlying 
protocols [102].
Consensus Protocol-based Solutions: Below is the literature that 
describes solutions that utilize consensus protocols to distribute the 
checkpointed state.
Bakhshi et al. simulate fault-tolerant persistent storage and analyze 
the performance of their proposed fault-tolerant persistent storage used 
for replicated, stateful applications [103,108]. A storage handling con
tainer is responsible for replicating the data amongst all other nodes, 
using Raft [29]. Netto et al. also use Raft in a Kubernetes context to 
replicate requests in an orderly manner to the replicas, providing active 
redundancy [104].
Javed et al. use Apache Kafka to replicate the data produced 
amongst different processing nodes exemplified in a camera surveil
lance use case [105].
4.3. Conclusions from the literature search
The search for literature covering checkpointing solutions in the 
context of industrial controller redundancy reveals that only one work 
focuses on the details of state transfer—namely, Kampa et al. and 
their use of RDMA in a vPLC setting [14]. They use CODESYS as 
the redundant PLC, which is limited to state transfer from a single 
task [58]. Furthermore, reliability-related aspects such as packet loss 
and recovery are not considered.
The literature search for checkpointing solutions in container and 
orchestration contexts reveals a significant amount of work, as shown 
in Table  4. The majority of the work uses CRIU for checkpoints. A file 
transfer, in one form or another, is the most common alternative for 
transferring the checkpointed data.
The work by Koziolek et al. like ours, stems from the ICS context, 
and the replication of state in application slack time is similar to the 
need of our redundancy use case, as described in Section 2 [7]. They 
use OPC UA Client–Server as the communication protocol to transfer 
the collected state data, which is performant enough for the use case 
they address.
Conclusions:
7 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 5
TCP and UDP performance comparison literature query.
 ‘‘tcp’’ AND ‘‘udp’’ AND (‘‘real-time’’ OR ‘‘real time’’) AND 
‘‘performance’’ AND ‘‘evaluation’’ 
• Detailed state transfer works targeting ICS redundancy are scarce, 
especially work considering protocol reliability aspects such as 
packet retransmissions.
• Container-based work favors CRIU plus file transfer, with limited 
discussion of real-time properties.
•We found no comparative evaluation for transferring check
pointed state in ICS redundancy (or generally).
As mentioned, none of the found literature compares protocols 
for transferring the checkpointed data, neither in an ICS redundancy 
use case nor in general. This finding motivates Step II, Section 5, 
where we define and describe features desirable for a state-transfer 
protocol, against which we match relevant protocols, followed by 
the experimental evaluation of top protocol candidates in Step III, 
Section 6.
5. Existing protocols—feature matching
The literature search in Section 4 reveals limited work on protocols 
for exchanging state data, particularly in the context of industrial 
controller redundancy. Motivated by this gap, this section aims to 
identify suitable protocols for state transfer.
TCP and UDP are the most widely used transport-layer protocols. 
While TCP is commonly regarded as reliable but unsuitable for real
time use, Section 5.1 reviews studies comparing TCP and UDP perfor
mance to assess this assumption.
As a second substep, we identify three feature categories that are 
highly desirable for controller redundancy state transfer and evaluate 
a set of protocols against these features. This analysis forms the pri
mary focus of the section and determines protocol suitability for the 
redundancy state transfer use case.
5.1. TCP and UDP comparison
Following the approach used in Section 4, we searched Scopus and 
Web of Science using the query in Table  5 to identify literature on TCP 
and UDP performance in real-time contexts.
Table  6 presents the remaining publications after filtering out those 
not explicitly comparing UDP and TCP. The Topic column shows the 
focus of each study (i.e., the targeted challenge), and the Packet De
livery Ratio (PDR) column indicates which protocol (UDP or TCP) was 
found to have the highest PDR, defined as: 
 
 𝐷𝑅=𝑃𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑑÷𝑃𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡 (1)
The throughput (Tput) column indicates the protocol achieving the 
highest measured throughput under the given conditions, while the 
latency column denotes the protocol with the lowest measured latency. 
The Network column specifies the network type (e.g., simulated, wired, 
or wireless).
As shown in Table  6, three studies did not measure PDR [109,113,
118]; among those that did, TCP consistently achieved the highest PDR, 
reflecting its congestion window (CWND), receiver window (RWND), 
and retransmission mechanisms [119]. In contrast, all studies measur
ing latency report lower latency for UDP. Throughput results are mixed: 
three studies favor UDP [112,116,118], while two favor TCP [110,117].
These results indicate that throughput performance is scenario
dependent. Using UDP without congestion or flow control risks resource 
exhaustion, leading to increased packet loss and reduced through
put. Overall, the literature confirms that TCP offers higher reliabil
ity, whereas UDP provides lower latency. A state replication protocol 
Table 6
TCP and UDP performance comparison.
 Ref. Topic PDR Tput Latency Network  (highest) (highest) (lowest) 
 [109] Dist. RT systems–– UDP Wired  [110] Video streaming TCP TCP UDP Simulated  [111] Voice streaming TCP–UDP Wired  [112] Video streaming TCP UDP–Simulated  [113] Congestion ctrl.–– UDP Simulated  [114] Voice streaming TCP–UDP Simulated  [115] Vehicle comm. TCP–UDP Wireless  [116] Microgrid ctrl. TCP UDP UDP Simulated  [117] Long-dist. TCP TCP–Wired  [118] Session init.–UDP UDP Simulated 
should therefore combine low latency, reliability, and high throughput, 
while also meeting security requirements discussed in Section 5.2.3. 
This motivates a closer examination of the desired features for state 
data transfer.
5.2. State-transfer protocol features
The industrial controller redundancy use case poses specific chal
lenges that motivate a set of desired protocol features. The follow
ing subsections define and justify these features in the context of 
redundancy state transfer.
While technologies such as TSN provide low latency and resource 
reservation [2], dependence on specialized technologies can restrict de
ployment and complicate life-cycle management, particularly in long
lived DCS installations that may operate for decades [15]. It is therefore 
desirable that the protocol relies only on widely available technologies 
and lower-layer protocols commonly supported by modern operating 
systems. Protocols that do not meet this platform-agnostic prerequisite 
are excluded; omitted protocols are discussed in Section 5.7.
The desired features are grouped into three categories: (i) Relia
bility, (ii) Real-time, and (iii) Security, all essential for transferring 
state data from a primary to a backup controller. Feature fulfillment 
is assessed using a three-level scale, Absent, Partly, and Fully, summa
rized in Table  12. Absent indicates no support; Partly denotes limited 
or conditional support, such as through optional profiles or auxiliary 
layers; and Fully indicates complete support.
As protocols evolve over time, the feature matching presented here 
reflects the specific protocol specifications considered. Implementa
tion variants and potential customizations are not evaluated; only the 
protocol specifications are used to determine fulfillment.
5.2.1. Reliability
The reliability-related features address protocol robustness and fault 
tolerance. Checkpointed state sizes vary by application, ranging from 
a few kilobytes to several megabytes [7,14]. When large states are 
segmented into multiple Ethernet frames, the loss of individual frames 
should not cause transfer failure, as this could leave the backup with
out the latest state. The protocol must therefore support recovery 
of lost segments through a retransmission mechanism, providing re
liable delivery of state data. We denote this feature as Reliable De
livery (Rel_RD), which requires both ordered delivery and recovery 
mechanisms.
Frame loss may result from disturbances, receiver buffer overflow, 
or network congestion. Flow control mitigates loss due to exhausted 
receiver buffers by regulating the sender’s rate [120], while congestion 
control addresses network overutilization at bottleneck links. Most 
congestion control algorithms reduce the send rate when congestion 
is inferred from missing or delayed acknowledgments [121]. However, 
such dynamic rate adaptation complicates throughput prediction and 
transfer-time estimation, as the send rate varies over time; this issue is 
further discussed in Section 6.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
8 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Table 7
Desired reliability-related features.
Identity
Description
Motivation 
Rel_RD
Rel_RC
Rel_NC
Reliable Delivery
Receiver Capacity
Network Capacity
Tolerance to transient faults 
Avoid loss due to buffer exhaustion 
Avoid overutilization-induced data loss 
Given the above, a desirable feature for protocol robustness is 
a mechanism for managing the receive buffer to reduce the risk of 
packet loss due to exhausted receiver capacity. We denote this feature 
as Rel_RC. The protocol should also include a mechanism to prevent 
packet loss resulting from overutilization of network capacity, de
noted as Rel_NC. Table  7 provides an overview of the reliability-related 
features.
We consider Rel_RC fully fulfilled if the protocol includes a mecha
nism specifically designed to prevent receiver buffer exhaustion. Simi
larly, we consider Rel_NC fully fulfilled if the protocol has a mechanism 
specifically designed to address network overutilization. Rel_RC and
Rel_NC are partly fulfilled if the protocol includes a feature that 
achieves a similar result, even if it is not primarily designed to address 
these specific needs.
5.2.2. Real-time
As described in Section 2.3, state data must be available at the 
backup within a bounded time to ensure that it can assume the pri
mary role without outputting outdated data. Therefore, the worst-case 
transfer time, including retransmissions, must be predictable, prefer
ably low, and, as mentioned, bounded. Hence, motivating the desired 
feature denoted RT_PT—predictable and bounded transfer time.
Given a bounded transfer time and a known application period, 
it becomes possible to define an expected reception interval. This 
enables the receiver to detect when new data has not arrived within 
the anticipated timeframe. Ideally, the protocol itself should handle 
this monitoring, thereby relieving the application of this responsibil
ity. This capability is represented by the update expectancy feature, 
denoted RT_UE. Section 2.2 explains the time span until state data 
invalidation.
Section 2 also explains that a controller may run applications with 
varying execution periods and state sizes. For example, a controller 
might host both a small application with a short cycle time and a larger 
one with a longer cycle time. In such cases, the state transfer for the 
smaller application should not be delayed by the state transfer induced 
by the larger one, as this could result in the state not being trans
ferred within the application period. To address this, a prioritization 
mechanism is desirable, hence motivating the desired feature RT_PR.
Table  8 provides an overview of the real-time related features 
described above.
5.2.3. Security
State data may contain sensitive information, such as internal con
trol application variables. Undetected alteration of state data may cause 
a backup device to obtain a false view of the state, which at failover 
can result in unexpected, faulty behavior of the new primary, including 
incorrect setting of I/O variables. When state data is being transferred 
over a shared network, protection mechanisms for the protocol should 
be included.
In a previously conducted security analysis of a redundancy link for 
state transfer [42], protocol-level mitigations, as described in Table  9 
as desired security features, should be supported to provide necessary 
protection against malicious actors.
A protocol for state replication should have a possibility to sup
port these mitigating mechanisms. The required mechanisms and the 
strength of the mechanisms may, however, vary based on application
specific requirements, e.g., the expected security level of the IEC 62443 
standard [122] to be fulfilled.
The most straightforward way to provide the protocol-level security 
features would be to encapsulate the state transfer protocol within a se
curity protocol on a lower level, e.g., utilizing Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) for stream-based protocols, or IPsec or Datagram Transport Layer 
Security (DTLS) for packet-oriented protocols.
Another approach is to use a standard protocol and apply security 
features to the payload using various post-protocol-stack mechanisms 
on the application layer.
IPsec can be used for providing security services on the internet 
layer, implying that the protective mechanisms will only be from 
node to node, not from application to application, i.e., it will only 
give assurance if the communicating nodes are trusted. IPsec provides 
services for integrity, authenticity, and confidentiality, as well as replay 
protection.
IPsec is often used in tunneling mode, forming Virtual Private Net
works (VPNs) between networks separated by an insecure network. 
However, that use case is not applicable for providing security services 
to a state transfer protocol; instead, transport mode is the appropri
ate option. Usually, IPsec protocol support is implemented at the 
OS level and therefore must be configured at the node level. Conse
quently, applications relying on the security services may have limited 
opportunities to enforce or verify that the measures are actually in 
place.
IPsec in transport mode does not support broadcast or multicast, as 
it is a point-to-point protocol.
TLS and DTLS are by far the most common security protocols 
used for providing security services for internet-based communication, 
denoted (D)TLS when both protocols are implied. Even though named
Transport Layer Security, (D)TLS is implemented in the application 
stack, making it part of the presentation layer. (D)TLS provides se
curity services for integrity, confidentiality, and authenticity. TLS is a 
connection-based protocol that uses a client–server approach and can 
be run with either single or mutual authentication, which is typically 
certificate-based. If run in single mode, the client can verify the au
thenticity of the server, but the server requires additional mechanisms 
to authenticate the client.
For providing security mechanisms to a state transfer protocol, the 
suggested approach would be to use mutually authenticated (D)TLS to 
assure data authenticity. The OPC UA Client–Server is implemented in 
a manner very similar to how mutually authenticated TLS works. It 
is worth noting that (D)TLS cannot be added to an existing protocol 
without adaptation at the application layer. Any protocol used for 
state transfer that wants the benefits of (D)TLS would need to include 
some changes, which would have implications on both deployment 
complexity and execution time.
Similarly to IPsec, (D)TLS cannot support broadcast or multicast 
traffic.
Post protocol-stack security mechanisms add the required secu
rity services at the data level while transporting data over a standard, 
non-secure protocol. This approach offers high flexibility in selecting 
security services but may increase implementation complexity. In par
ticular, implementing custom security protocols is generally considered 
poor practice; instead, well-established patterns and libraries should be 
used when adopting this approach. Since the degree of security fea
ture fulfillment depends on the specific implementation, post-protocol 
security is classified as implementation-specific (Impl. spec.) in Table 
10.
Secure OPC UA PubSub over UDP is one example of such a post-fix 
security mechanism, which can provide some of the required security 
services, e.g., confidentiality, while still supporting UDP multicast on 
the lower protocol level.
In addition to the well-known security protocol above, some com
munication protocols and standards we evaluate have security profiles 
or standard amendments. If so, it is described for each protocol and 
summarized, along with the security protocol feature fulfillment, in 
Table  10.
9 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 8
Desired real-time features.
 Identity Description Motivation 
 RT_PT Predictable transfer time Bounded transfer time given bandwidth usage  RT_UE Update time expectancy Backup receives state data within period  RT_PR Prioritization Long-period transfers must not block shorter ones 
Table 9
Desired security features.
 Identity Description Motivation 
 Sec_Int Data integrity State data cannot be altered without detection  Sec_Auth Data authenticity Origin of the data can be verified  Sec_Conf Data confidentiality State Data cannot be read by unintended receiver  Sec_Fresh Data freshness State data cannot be replayed at a later time without detection 
Table 10
Security protocol feature fulfillment.
 Protocol Sec_Int Sec_Auth Sec_Conf Sec_Fresh 
 IPsec Partly Partly Fully Fully  TLS single auth. Fully Partly Fully Fully  TLS mutual auth. Fully Fully Fully Fully  Post-protocol sec. Impl. spec. Impl. spec. Impl. spec. Impl. spec.  SRTP Fully Fully Fully Fully  DDS Sec. Spec. Fully Partly Fully Partly  UASC Fully Fully Fully Fully  OPC UA SKS Fully Partly Fully Fully 
Table 11
Reliable real-time protocol—Google query.
 reliable real-time data communication protocols
5.3. Protocol selection
The protocols selected are identified from the literature referenced 
in earlier sections, i.e., in Sections 4and5.1. In addition, we comple
mented the list by turning to Google with the query shown in Table 
11.
The listed protocols are grouped into four categories: (i) Transport 
layer protocols, (ii) Application layer protocols, (iii) Non-standardized 
protocols, and (iv) Excluded protocols, each described in a separate sub
section. Transport and application layer protocols are standardized and 
classified by their respective layers, while non-standardized protocols 
are described in scientific literature but lack formal standardization. 
The excluded protocols subsection lists and motivates protocols omitted 
from feature matching. Protocol security is matched against the security 
protocols defined in Section 5.2.3 and summarized in Table  9.
Table  12 summarizes each protocol’s real-time and reliability fea
tures. The ‘‘Security Integration’’ column describes how security mech
anisms are incorporated, while the ‘‘Security Protocol’’ column indi
cates the typically used protocols; a protocol listed under ‘‘Security 
Integration’’ denotes mandatory use of that security mechanism.
5.4. Transport layer protocols
This section presents the desired feature fulfillment of the standard
ized transport protocol alternatives.
5.4.1. Transmission control protocol—TCP
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) was first standardized in 
the early 1980s [123]. It is a connection-based, reliable protocol that 
provides an ordered byte stream to its users.
Reliability features: TCP fully fulfills Rel_RD since it provides 
ordered delivery and detects and retransmits lost data. The receiver 
advertises the remaining space in its receive buffer, thereby fulfill
ing Rel_RC. Additionally, a TCP node must implement congestion con
trol mechanisms, such as slow start and reduction of transmission rate 
upon loss detection [123], which means TCP also fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: Due to congestion window management and 
the slow start mechanism, calculating the transfer time for a known 
data size depends on the Round-Trip Time (RTT), as the congestion 
window increases upon receiving acknowledgments. Packet loss further 
decreases the congestion window. Consequently, the transfer time de
pends on the number of packets lost and when they are lost. Therefore, 
TCP only partly fulfills RT_PT, as further detailed in Section 6. There is 
no concept of data expiration in TCP, meaning RT_UE is absent. Addi
tionally, TCP only carries a single stream of data and thus lacks support 
for prioritization, making RT_PR absent. In fact, TCP can suffer from 
head-of-line blocking, where a lost segment prevents delivery of already 
received data due to TCP’s requirement for in-order delivery [124]. 
As a result, multiple application layer streams sharing the same TCP 
connection may experience head-of-line blocking.
Security features: As mentioned, TCP is a connection-oriented 
byte-stream transport layer protocol that does not provide security 
features; it relies on post-protocol security. TCP is commonly used with 
TLS as the post-protocol solution.
5.4.2. User datagram protocol—UDP
Like TCP, the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) was standardized 
in the early 1980s [125]. UDP is a connectionless, packet-oriented 
protocol that delivers individual packets, rather than a byte stream like 
TCP, to its users.
Reliability features: UDP does not provide retransmission capabil
ities nor offer mechanisms for managing receiver or network resources 
to prevent buffer exhaustion. Therefore, Rel_RD, Rel_RC, and Rel_NC are 
considered absent for UDP.
Real-time features: UDP does not implement congestion control, 
such as slow start or adaptive sending rates based on acknowledgments. 
The protocol does not regulate the send rate in any way. Hence, no 
flow, congestion algorithms, or other UDP-specific mechanisms impact 
transfer time predictability, and thereby, RT_PT is fully fulfilled. UDP 
does not have any expiration time feature or prioritization capabilities. 
Thus, RT_UE and RT_PR are absent.
Security features: UDP is a connectionless transport layer protocol, 
and like TCP, it does not provide security features; it relies on post
protocol security. Since UDP is packet-oriented, DTLS is a suitable 
post-protocol UDP solution.
5.4.3. NACK-oriented reliable multicast—NORM
NACK-Oriented Reliable Multicast (NORM) is a connectionless, re
liable protocol for bulk data transfer to one or more receivers [126]. 
NORM supports three categories of data transfer: (i) memory, (ii) 
file, and (iii) streams. NORM uses Forward Error Correction (FEC) to 
aid in failure recovery. With FEC, NORM can avoid retransmissions 
by reconstructing lost data from the error correction information. In 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
10 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 12
Protocol feature fulfillment.
 Protocol Rel_RD Rel_RC Rel_NC RT_PT RT_UE RT_PR Security integration Security protocol prescribed 
 Standardized transport layer protocols
 TCP Fully Fully Fully Partly Absent Absent Post-protocol–  UDP Absent Absent Absent Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol–  NORM Fully Partly Fully Absent Absent Absent Post-protocol IpSec  RTP Absent Partly Partly Fully Partly Absent Post-protocol SRTP (own)  SCTP Fully Fully Fully Partly Absent Partly Post-protocol DTLS  QUIC Fully Fully Fully Partly Absent Partly TLS single auth. TLS single auth. 
 Standardized application layer protocols
 DDS Fully Partly Partly Partly Fully Partly Post-protocol DDS Security Specification  OPC UA Fully Fully Fully Partly Partly Absent Post-protocol UASC  (CS)a   OPC UA Absent Absent Absent Fully Fully Fully Post-protocol OPC UA SKS  (PubSub)b  
 Non standardized protocols
 RUDP Fully Fully Absent Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol IPsec  RBUDP Fully Absent Fully Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol–  PA-UDP Fully Fully Partly Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol–  UDT Fully Fully Fully Partly Absent Absent Post-protocol–  RUFC Fully Fully Fully Partly Absent Absent Post-protocol–  SABUL Fully Partly Partly Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol–  Tsunami Fully Partly Partly Fully Absent Absent Post-protocol– 
 Excluded protocols
 AMQP See Section 5.7.1
 COAP See Section 5.7.2
 DCCP See Section 5.7.3
 FASP See Section 5.7.4
 MQTT See Section 5.7.5
 RoCE See Section 5.7.6
 Industrial PROFINET, EthernetIP, EtherCAT,
 protocols and ModbusTCP. See Section 5.7.7
a OPC UA CS (Client-Sever) utilizes OPC UA TCP.
b OPC UA PubSub utilizes OPC UA UDP.
addition to FEC, NORM uses Negative ACKnowledgments (NACK) to 
request the retransmission of lost packets when necessary.
Reliability features: As mentioned above, NORM combines FEC 
with NACK-based retransmissions to recover from packet loss, thereby 
fully fulfilling Rel_RD. Although NORM does not explicitly exchange 
receiver buffer capacity information, the sender can announce the size 
of the data being sent, allowing the receiver to allocate appropriate 
buffers. Therefore, we categorize Rel_RC as partly fulfilled. Like TCP, 
NORM uses a slow start congestion avoidance mechanism, gradually 
increasing the transmission rate until packet loss is detected. Since 
NORM is NACK-based, it uses an explicit message to retrieve round-trip 
times. The trip times are input to the transmission rate reduction due to 
packet loss, and since NORM can handle multiple receivers, it gathers 
the round-trip time from all. Hence, NORM fully fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: The congestion control mechanism makes trans
fer time prediction more difficult, especially since some retransmission 
timeouts are randomized by design, hence, RT_PT is absent. Further
more, NORM does not have any expectation of timely data updates, nor 
does it have a prioritization mechanism. Hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR
are absent.
Security features: The protocol specification states that the NORM 
is compatible with IPsec, at the same time, it recommends application
level integrity [126]. Hence, it has to rely on post-protocol security but 
does not explicitly mention any other protocol besides IPsec.
5.4.4. Real-time transport protocol—RTP
The Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) is a connectionless, packet
oriented protocol designed in 1996 for audio and video streaming [127]. 
Although RTP typically utilizes UDP, it is not limited to UDP. RTP 
uses the RTP Control Protocol (RTCP) for control [127]. RTCP is also 
connectionless and usually operates over UDP. RTCP provides quality 
feedback, congestion, and flow control for RTP.
Reliability features: RTP targets streaming audio and video, where 
minor data losses might not significantly impact the experience, and 
the value of the data diminishes quickly over time. Consequently, 
RTP does not support ordered delivery or retransmission mechanisms; 
thus, Rel_RD is absent. While RTP does not provide information about 
receiver-side buffer capacity, its companion protocol, RTCP, offers feed
back on packet loss. Send rates can be adjusted based on the packet loss 
information to reduce loss due to receiver-side buffer overutilization. 
Hence, RTP partly fulfill Rel_RC. Similarly, RTP lacks explicit con
gestion control mechanisms to prevent network resource exhaustion. 
However, RTP applications can utilize RTCP’s packet loss feedback to 
reduce send rates and mitigate congestion risks. As a result,  Rel_NC is 
also partly fulfilled.
Real-time features: RTP is designed to use UDP and does not 
enforce rate control, leaving that responsibility to the application; 
hence, RTP fully fulfills RT_PT. RTP utilizes timestamps, allowing an 
application to determine if the data is too old. However, RTP does not 
invalidate outdated data; hence, RT_UE is partly fulfilled. RTP has no 
prioritization mechanisms; hence RT_PR is absent.
Security features: RTP has a security profile named Secure Real
time Transport Protocol (SRTP) defined in Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF) Request For Comments (RFC) 3711 [128]. Adding SRTP 
to the RTP is described as a ‘‘bump in the stack’’, i.e., as SRTP resides 
between the application and the RTP transport layer, in other words, 
post-protocol from the view of RTP. SRTP provides message authentica
tion, a receiver can verify that the sender is likely to originate from the 
claimed sender, hence fulfilling Sec_Auth. RSTP also describes integrity 
handling, confidentiality mechanisms, and replay detection prevention, 
fulfilling Sec_Int, Sec_Conf, and Sec_Fresh.
5.4.5. Stream control transmission protocol—SCTP
Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) is a connection and 
message-oriented transport protocol from the early 2000s designed to 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
11 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
address wishes not fulfilled by TCP and/or UDP, such as reliable trans
fer without head-of-line blocking by allowing more than one stream of 
data over a single connection [129]. SCTP offers reliable data transfer 
per stream and multi-homing; a node can have multiple IP addresses 
that SCTP can utilize for fault tolerance by using different paths through 
the network.
SCTP runs directly on top of IP, as UDP and TCP, but it is not as 
widely adopted as TCP and UDP. Linux and VxWorks support it, and 
third-party drivers exist for Windows [130–132].
Reliability features: SCTP fully supports retransmissions of lost 
data and provides ordered delivery; hence, SCTP fully fulfill Rel_RD. 
However, ordered delivery is optional. Like TCP, SCTP fully fulfills
Rel_RC, since each connection (or associations as SCTP connections are 
called due to the multi-homing capabilities) has a receiver window 
representing the receiver’s capacity. SCTP has one receiver window, 
even if the association is multi-home; the smallest announced window 
sets the limit. SCTP also has a congestion window that is dynamically 
adapted, as TCP does, to avoid network resource exhaustion-induced 
congestion, hence fully fulfills Rel_NC. There is one congestion window 
per home, i.e., network path.
Real-time features: SCTP congestion handling is basically that of 
TCP but capable of handling multiple paths as needed with multi
homing support. Due to that, we use the same arguments as for TCP 
regarding transfer time predictability, namely that the dynamic con
gestion window handling complicates the transmission time prediction; 
hence, SCTP only partly fulfills RT_PT. SCTP does not offer any expi
ration time on data; therefore, RT_UE is absent. Although SCTP offers 
different streams, these streams lack prioritization attribute differen
tiation. However, an application can prioritize the different streams 
differently; hence, RT_PR is partly fulfilled.
Security features: RFC 3436 describes TLS over SCTP [133], and 
later RFC 6083 describes DTLS over SCTP [134]. TLS over SCTP has 
limitations due to SCTP being packet-oriented. Hence, DTLS over SCTP 
security is a later RFC to address those weaknesses. In other words, the 
security protocol to use on top of SCTP is optional, hence post-protocol.
5.4.6. QUIC–QUIC
QUIC (not an acronym) is a connection-oriented protocol that uses 
UDP for the actual data exchange, designed by Google to improve 
HTTPS performance [135]. RFC 9000 describes the core parts of the 
protocol, and IETF RFC 9002 defines the congestion control [136,137]. 
QUIC reduces the connection establishment latency, which can signif
icantly reduce the overall latency in use cases with many short-lived 
connections. QUIC also provides multiple streams, relieving QUIC from 
the head-of-line blocking problem.
Reliability features: As mentioned, QUIC is a reliable protocol 
that provides ordered delivery. Retransmission handles packet losses; 
hence, QUIC fully fulfills Rel_RD. QUIC provides flow management by 
exchanging information about the receiver side receive buffer capacity. 
Hence, QUIC fully fulfill Rel_RC. QUIC tries to prevent network resource 
congestion due to overutilization with congestion control, similar to 
TCP; hence, QUIC fully fulfill Rel_NC.
Real-time features: Using the same argument as for TCP concern
ing transfer time predictability, the slow start and dynamic congestion 
handle make it harder to predict; even though the QUIC variant is 
quicker to recover, we say that RT_PT is partly fulfilled. QUIC does 
not provide any expiration time on data; hence, RT_UE is absent. QUIC 
does not prioritize the streams and the transferred data; that is up 
to the application. However, since QUIC supports different streams, it 
provides the foundation for the application to prioritize them; hence, 
QUIC partly fulfills RT_PR.
Security features: QUIC requires TLS. TLS is an integrated part of 
the protocol, and it uses single authentication, where only the server is 
authenticated.
5.5. Application layer protocols
This section presents the desired feature matching of standardized 
application layer protocols.
5.5.1. Data distribution service—DDS
The Data Distribution Service (DDS) is a middleware that pro
vides distributed applications with a data-centric publish–subscribe 
communication model [138]. DDS utilizes a UDP-mappable abstract 
protocol called Real-Time Publish–Subscribe (RTPS) [139]. DDS also 
has a specification in beta state on how to map DDS onto TSN capable 
networks [140].
Reliability features: DDS has mechanisms to resend due to loss and 
provides ordered delivery; hence, it fully fulfills Rel_RD. DDS does not 
provide an exchange of receiver buffer capacity. However, it can run 
on top of TCP, which does. Hence, DDS partly fulfills Rel_RC. The same 
reasoning applies to network resource utilization. Therefore, DDS can 
partly fulfill Rel_NC.
Real-time features: DDS does not mandate the underlying trans
port protocol; the transfer time predictability depends on the protocol 
used. Hence, we say that DDS partly fulfill RT_PT. DDS provides a 
deadline property for subscribed data, invalidating data if not updated 
within that period, fully fulfilling RT_UE. DDS has a prioritization 
mechanism, but how well they are adhered to depends on the used 
transport protocol; hence, DDS partly fulfill RT_PR.
Security features: The DDS Security Specification defines a security 
model for DDS [141]. DDS does not mandate the use of the security 
specification; therefore, DDS supports post-protocol security integra
tion. However, the DDS Security Specification should be followed to 
stay compliant with the specification. The specification describes the 
handling of all the security-related features. DDS, like OPC UA Pub
Sub, recommends using symmetric keys for real-time data exchange to 
improve performance. Hence, authentication is provided by controlling 
the key distribution.
5.5.2. OPC UA client–server—OPC UA TCP
OPC UA Client–Server (also denoted OPC UA CS for space conser
vation) is a part of the OPC UA standard [142]. OPC UA Client–Server 
invokes remote procedures exposed by OPC UA servers [143]. OPC 
UA Client–Server can utilize an abstract protocol, called the OPC UA 
Connect Protocol (UACP), for platform- and technology-independent 
reasons. OPC UA also describes the mapping of OPC UA CS to TCP 
(OPC UA TCP) and HTTPS (OPC UA HTTPS) as underlying protocols. 
We assume OPC UA TCP for the desired feature matching.
Reliability features: OPC UA TCP, as the name implies and as 
described above, uses TCP; hence, the fulfillment of reliability features 
is the same as for TCP. That is, full fulfillment of Rel_RD since TCP 
handles retransmission, TCP also provides receiver buffer management 
and thereby OPC UA TCP fulfill Rel_RC. TCP also has a mechanism to 
avoid congestion by over-utilizing the network; hence, OPC UA TCP 
fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: Since OPC UA TCP uses TCP, the transfer 
time predictability argumentation is the same as for TCP; the dynamic 
congestion window handling makes predictability harder, especially 
if losses affect the congestion window, hence OPC UA TCP partly 
fulfills RT_PT. OPC UA provides timestamps. Hence, mechanisms exist 
to detect outdated data, but it is up to the client to utilize them. Hence, 
we classify feature RT_UE as partly fulfilled. OPC UA Client–Server 
does provide prioritization mechanisms for how a server should handle 
subscriptions, which is a step in the right direction. However, TCP does 
not have any prioritization. As mentioned earlier, TCP also suffers from 
the head-of-the-line block. Hence, RT_PR is absent.
Security features: OPC UA is designed to operate in a very het
erogeneous industrial landscape. Hence, it provides a flexible use of 
security mechanisms, where OPC UA nodes can choose to conform to 
suitable security profiles [143–145]. Hence, the security integration 
12 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
is post-protocol; however, the selection is limited to comply with the 
standard. This description assumes OPC UA TCP secured with OPC UA 
Secure Conversation (UASC). UASC can fulfill all the desired security 
features, as shown in Table  10.
5.5.3. OPC UA PubSub—OPC UA UDP
OPC UA PubSub is an additional OPC UA communication model, 
and as the name implies, it is a publish–subscribe communication 
model [146]. OPC UA PubSub supports two broker models, broker
less and broker-based. The broker-based model uses Advanced Mes
sage Queuing Protocol (AMQP) or Message Queue Telemetry Trans
port (MQTT). The broker-less alternative targets real-time use, such as 
that between a device and a controller. It utilizes network equipment 
for brokering, specifically multicast groups on Ethernet and IP. The bro
kerless OPC UA PubSub can run directly over Ethernet or UDP, support
ing connectionless and unidirectional communication between pub
lishers and subscribers. There is no mandated communication-related 
feedback from subscribers to publishers. The UA Datagram Protocol 
(UADP) specifies the brokerless OPC UA PubSub message format, in
cluding its headers and their meanings. We base the feature discussion 
on OPC UA PubSub UADP, which is built on top of UDP.
Reliability features: OPC UA UDP uses UDP and does not mandate 
any additional resend mechanism; sequence numbers are optional. 
Sequence number usage can provide ordered delivery; however, since 
there is no resend option and no alternative to it,  Rel_RD is absent. Fur
thermore, OPC UA UDP does not exchange receiver buffer information; 
hence, Rel_RC is absent. Rel_NC is also absent, as there are no additional 
measures for network resource management and congestion avoidance. 
It is worth noting that mappings between OPC UA PubSub and TSN 
have been described, which could then reserve network resources and 
detect overutilization if used [147].
Real-time features: OPC UA UDP uses UDP with no throttling; 
hence, the transfer time is predictable and fulfills RT_PT. Subscribers 
to published data can error mark that data if not updated within 
the expected interval, hence fully fulfilling RT_UE. OPC UA PubSub 
also provides prioritization levels that are mappable onto underlying 
network prioritization mechanisms such as differentiated service code 
point (DSCP) in the IP header or the priority code point (PCP) in 
the Ethernet frame [147]. The standard prescribes that the processing 
of outgoing data with higher priority should precede that of lower 
priority, hence fully fulfilling RT_PR.
Security features: OPC UA PubSub does not enforce any secu
rity. Hence, the security integration is post-protocol from the OPC 
UA UDP perspective. However, the OPC UA prescribed mechanisms 
should again be used to ensure compatibility. OPC UA PubSub uses 
Security Key Service (SKS) to provide keys for signing and encrypting 
messages [146]. We denote this OPC UA SKS. Keys are distributed 
based on roles. Hence, authentication is provided by controlling the 
key distribution. OPC UA SKS can also fulfill the other desired security 
features, as shown in Table  10.
5.6. Non-standardized protocols
This section presents the desired feature matching on non-standa
rdized protocols found in the literature.
5.6.1. Reliable UDP—RUDP
Reliable UDP (RUDP) is a reliable, connection-oriented protocol 
built on top of UDP, as defined in a draft RFC [148]. RUDP provides 
reliable and ordered delivery and flow control, but no congestion 
control.
Reliability features: RUDP fully fulfills Rel_RD, i.e., ordered de
livery, loss detection, and retransmission of lost packets. It exchanges 
information about how many outstanding packets are allowed before 
an acknowledgment must be received, serving as the flow control. 
RUDP does not have any network over-utilization prevention. Hence, 
fulfilling Rel_RC, but Rel_NC is absent.
Real-time features: RUDP has no congestion control and a fixed 
limit for the number of outstanding packets allowed, serving as a 
flow control mechanism. Hence, the predictability of transfer time 
only depends on how many packets are lost, not when they are lost. 
Therefore, RUDP fulfills RT_PT. RUDP has no expectancy update time 
nor prioritization; hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR are absent.
Security features: RUDP does not mandate any security protocol. 
Hence, it is post-protocol. The specification mentions that it is IPsec 
compatible.
5.6.2. Reliable blast UDP—RBUDP
Reliable Blast UDP (RBUDP) is, as the name implies, a reliable pro
tocol for transferring bulk data that uses UDP to avoid TCP congestion 
handling to increase throughput [149]. RBUDP uses UDP to send data 
and is configured with a specific send rate to prevent exceeding the 
bandwidth capacity of the underlying network. It utilizes a secondary 
management channel over TCP to communicate information about the 
transfer, including lost packages.
Reliability features: RBUDP has a resend mechanism, and ordered 
delivery is ensured with numbered packets, fully fulfilling Rel_RD. 
RBUDP has no mechanism for synchronizing receiver-side buffer capac
ity; therefore, Rel_RC is absent. RBUDP adjusts its sending to a specified 
send rate that should be selected so that the underlying network is not 
over-utilized; hence, RBUDP fully fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: RBUDP uses the send rate to avoid overutiliz
ing the network; given the send rate (and the packet size), the transfer 
time is predictable; hence RT_PT is fully fulfilled. RBUDP does not 
provide any update expectancy mechanism or prioritization means; 
hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR are absent.
Security features: RBUDP does not describe any security measures. 
Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.6.3. Performance adaptive UDP—PA-UDP
Performance Adaptive UDP (PA-UDP) targets bulk data transfer, and 
the authors argue that there is no need for congestion control on a 
dedicated link; hence, PA-UDP uses UDP for the data transfer [150]. 
In addition, PA-UDP also uses a TCP channel to communicate informa
tion feedback, such as lost messages. PA-UDP includes a rate control 
dictated by the receiver, as the protocol targets data transfer in use 
cases where disk access storing the received data is the limiting factor.
Reliability features: PA-UDP provides ordered delivery and re
transmission of lost packets, i.e., fully fulfilling Rel_RD. PA-UDP does 
not explicitly exchange buffer size information, but the sender can 
limit the send rate if buffer exhaustion is at risk; hence, fully fulfilling 
what Rel_RC is about. Assuming the sender and receiver are aware of 
the capacity of the underlying link, rate control can serve as a means 
to avoid overutilizing the receiver and the network, even though it 
was primarily designed to prevent overutilizing the receiver. Hence, 
PA-UDP partly fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: PA-UDP uses UDP with a receiver-set rate 
control; hence, predicting transfer time is straightforward. Therefore, 
PA-UDP fully fulfills RT_PT. PA-UDP does not provide any update mon
itoring or prioritization mechanism. Hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR are 
absent.
Security features: PA-UDP does not describe any security mea
sures. Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.6.4. UDP-based data transfer protocol—UDT
UDP-based Data Transfer (UDT) is a reliable and connection-oriented 
protocol designed to more effectively utilize high-speed links by in
troducing an alternative congestion control mechanism compared to 
TCP [151]. Specifically, using TCP over high-speed links with long dis
tances and long round-trip times can reduce throughput. UDT addresses 
this problem, and as the name implies, UDT utilizes UDP.
13 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Reliability features: UDT fully fulfills Rel_RD; it handles out-of
order packets as well as resends lost packets. UDT exchanges receiver 
side capacity, and the sender adjusts to that, fully fulfilling Rel_RC. UDT 
has a dynamic congestion control to avoid congestion due to overuti
lization of the network; hence, it fully fulfills Rel_NC. The UDT con
gestion control does not react to just one lost packet thereby avoiding 
a lossy link causing congestion window reduction due to disturbance 
rather than congestion.
Real-time features: UDT has, as mentioned, a dynamic congestion 
control. We use the same argument as for TCP when it comes to the 
fulfillment of RT_PT for UDT. The actual transfer time depends on when 
the disturbance occurs, not just on the number of losses. Hence, UDT 
partly fulfill RT_PT. UDT does not provide any update monitoring or 
prioritization. Hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR are absent in UDT.
Security features: UDT does not describe any security measures. 
Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.6.5. Reliable UDP with flow control—RUFC
Reliable UDP with Flow Control (RUFC) is a connection-oriented 
protocol designed to be a performant alternative that addresses the un
derutilization that may result from congestion and flow control [152]. 
RUFC introduces a layer between the application and UDP for evaluat
ing different control algorithms.
Reliability features: RUFC fully handles retransmission and or
dered delivery, fully fulfilling Rel_RD. It also supports window manage
ment, hence receiver buffer capacity control, and fulfills Rel_RC. RUFC 
has traffic shaping support that can do flow control to adapt to the 
network capacity; therefore, RUFC fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: Rate control is optional when using RUFC, and 
the paper evaluates different types, and neither is as performant as 
native UDP. The predictability depends on the rate control used; hence, 
RUFC partly fulfills RT_PT. RUFC does not have any update monitoring 
mechanism or prioritization. Hence, both RT_UE and RT_PR are absent.
Security features: RUFC does not describe any security measures. 
Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.6.6. Simple available bandwidth utilization library—SABUL
Simple Available Bandwidth Utilization Library (SABUL) is a reli
able and lightweight protocol with flow and rate control [153] SABUL, 
like RBUDP and PA-UDP, uses UDP for data exchange and TCP for 
acknowledgment and rate control; see Sections 5.6.2 and 5.6.3. SABUL 
transmits a fixed number of packages and then waits for reception 
information from the receiver over the TCP channel.
Reliability features: SABUL handles retransmission and ordering, 
and the sender is informed about lost messages after transmitting a 
fixed amount of packages. SABUL fully handles retransmission and 
ordered delivery and thereby fulfills Rel_RD. Since SABUL transmits 
a fixed amount of packages, this is a rather simplistic receiver buffer 
management and network resource management; hence, SABUL partly 
fulfills Rel_RC and Rel_NC.
Real-time features: Given the rather simplistic transmission control 
of SABUL, where a predefined number of packages are transmitted 
before waiting for acknowledgment, predicting the transfer time is 
straightforward. The transmission time does not depend on when pack
ages are lost, as for TCP; it only depends on how many are lost. Hence, 
SABUL fully fulfills RT_PR. As mentioned, SABUL is designed to be a 
lightweight protocol. Hence, it does not support any data expiration 
properties or prioritization. In other words, both RT_UE and RT_PR are 
absent.
Security features: SABUL does not describe any security measures. 
Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.6.7. Tsunami
Tsunami is an application protocol designed to achieve faster file 
transfer than FTP over TCP by FTP over UDP [154]. Tsunami is 
an application-layer protocol, and like SABUL and others (see Sec
tion 5.6.6), Tsunami uses UDP for data transfer and TCP for control 
data. Tsunami examples of control parameters include transfer rate and 
delay time between transferred data blocks.
Reliability features: Tsunami provides recovery of lost data and 
ordered delivery; hence, Tsunami fully fulfills Rel_RD. Tsunami does 
not explicitly exchange receiver buffer sizes, but it exchanges desired 
transfer rate and delay time, which can be set so that the receiver buffer 
is not exhausted and the underlying network is not overutilized. Hence, 
Tsunami partly fulfill Rel_RC and Rel_NC.
Real-time features: As mentioned, Tsunami uses a rate and a delay 
to avoid congestion. Hence, the transfer time depends on the amount of 
data to transfer and the number of lost packages, not when the packages 
are lost. Hence, Tsunami fully fulfills RT_PR. Tsunami do not have 
any expiration date mechanism nor prioritization. Hence, both RT_UE
and RT_PR are absent.
Security features: Tsunami does not describe any security mea
sures. Hence, security integration must be post-protocol.
5.7. Excluded protocols
This section lists protocols excluded from feature matching because 
they are deemed unsuitable for the use case, but are relevant enough 
to warrant their exclusion.
5.7.1. Advanced message queuing protocol—AMQP
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is an application
layer protocol that supports broker-based publish/subscribe and targets 
enterprise communication between heterogeneous systems [155].
AMQP is excluded since it is a broker-based protocol that targets 
heterogeneous exchanges through a broker, rather than the real-time 
point-to-point transfer of larger data sizes.
5.7.2. Constrained application protocol—COAP
The Constrained Application Protocol (COAP) is an application
layer protocol that exposes RESTful APIs in a resource-constrained man
ner, compared to HTTPS, targeting resource-constrained devices [156].
COAP is excluded since it primarily targets lightweight communi
cation for more resource-constrained devices, such as reading samples 
from battery-powered intelligent sensors, rather than real-time bulk 
data transfers.
5.7.3. Datagram congestion control protocol—DCCP
As the name implies, Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) 
is a datagram-based transport layer protocol that supports congestion 
control [157]. The motivation behind DCCP is to spare applications 
using datagram protocols the need for congestion control implementa
tion, as congestion control is highly recommended for Internet-bound 
traffic [158,159].
DCCP is excluded due to its limited spread and support in operating 
systems’ network stacks.
5.7.4. Fast adaptive and secure protocol—FASP
Fast Adaptive and Secure Protocol (FASP) is a proprietary protocol 
developed by Aspera, now part of IBM [160,161], targeting high
speed data transfer over long distances. FASP overcomes some TCP 
shortcomings, such as lowered bandwidth utilization with increased 
Round-Trip Time (RTT).
FASP is excluded since it is an IBM proprietary protocol.
14 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
5.7.5. Message queue telemetry transport—MQTT
Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a broker-based pub
lish/subscribe protocol targeting resource-constrained devices and, as 
the name implies, targets the exchange of telemetry data, and by that 
aspiring to be a lightweight protocol [162].
MQTT is excluded since it is a broker-based protocol that primarily 
targets the exchange of smaller data sizes rather than a real-time 
exchange of larger data sizes, such as the application’s state.
5.7.6. Remote memory access over converged ethernet—RoCE
Remote direct memory access over Converged Ethernet (RoCE) is 
a technology used in data centers for high-speed data transfer, often 
aided with hardware support [163,164]. RoCE is Infiniband’s network 
and transport layer encapsulated on top of Ethernet. From RoCE version 
2, also UDP over IP is supported, and there exist software versions 
that do not require hardware support, which has been shown to be a 
performant alternative for container communication [165].
RoCE and RDMA are excluded since they require OS Kernel and/or 
hardware support.
5.7.7. Industrial protocols
Industrial protocols are developed for industrial contexts, with 
PROFINET, EthernetIP, EtherCAT, and Modbus TCP among the most 
widely used [166,167]. These protocols are designed for real-time 
cyclic exchange between controllers and devices, typically involving 
small data sizes such as sensor inputs and actuator outputs, often 
confined to a single Ethernet frame [168,169].
Consequently, PROFINET, EthernetIP, EtherCAT, and Modbus TCP 
are excluded, as they are optimized for efficient exchange of small data 
items rather than for the large state transfers required for controller 
redundancy.
5.8. Conclusions from feature matching
The protocol feature matching summarized in Table  12 shows that 
no single protocol fully satisfies all desired features. SCTP, QUIC, DDS, 
and OPC UA TCP provide the closest matches.
Among these, DDS and QUIC are less suitable for industrial con
troller redundancy. DDS introduces an additional middleware layer, 
whereas OPC UA is already the middleware used by industrial con
trollers (see Section 2). QUIC is less favorable than SCTP, as SCTP is 
available on both VxWorks and Linux (see Section 5.4.5).
As both OPC UA TCP and SCTP only partly fulfill RT_PT, Section 6 
evaluates their transfer times and predictability. Since OPC UA TCP is 
based on TCP, the evaluation focuses on TCP behavior, as detailed in 
Section 6.
Conclusions:
• No single protocol satisfies all features.
• Top candidates: SCTP and OPC UA Client–Server (OPC UA TCP).
• The real-time feature RT_PT is only partly met, motivating the 
work in Part III (see Section 6).
6. Existing protocols—experimental evaluation
As motivated in Section 5.8, OPC UA TCP and SCTP emerge as the 
top candidates. Since OPC UA TCP runs on TCP, and TCP provides 
the reliability features while also determining the real-time fulfillment 
grades RT_PT and RT_PR (see Section 5.5.2), we evaluate TCP directly 
to assess the suitability of TCP-based protocols for state transfer.
In addition to TCP, SCTP is evaluated as the second top candidate. 
The following subsections analyze TCP and SCTP as state transfer pro
tocol candidates, focusing on the partially fulfilled real-time properties 
identified in Table  12.
As virtual controllers gain interest, real-time performance remains 
a key challenge [30]. Systems with hard real-time requirements are 
therefore likely to rely on real-time operating systems. Where applica
ble, we use VxWorks configurations to analyze TCP and SCTP behavior 
affecting transfer time in Sections 6.1 and 6.2. This analysis forms the 
basis for the experimental evaluation in Section 6.3, followed by a 
discussion of the results and their implications for the redundancy use 
case.
6.1. TCP in VxWorks
This section describes TCP behavior in VxWorks 24.03 based on the 
RFCs supported by its network stack [132]. Although RFC 793 defines 
TCP and is referenced in the VxWorks documentation, it has been 
obsoleted by RFC 9293 [123,170]. VxWorks also supports Selective 
Acknowledgment (SACK) as specified in RFC 2018, allowing receivers 
to report successfully received segments and enabling senders to avoid 
unnecessary retransmissions [171].
Congestion control in VxWorks follows RFC 5681, which specifies 
Slow Start, Congestion Avoidance, Fast Retransmit, and Fast Recov
ery [172]. The amount of unacknowledged data is limited by the mini
mum of the congestion window (𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑) and receiver window (𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑). 
In VxWorks, 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 is initialized to 2 ⋅ 𝑚𝑠𝑠, with 𝑚𝑠𝑠 = 1420 bytes, 
while the slow start threshold (𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ) is set to 65,535. As a result, 
slow start is active upon connection establishment, increasing 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 by 
one 𝑚𝑠𝑠 for each acknowledgment of newly received data (summarized 
in Algorithm 1). The receiver window 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 equals the socket receive 
buffer, which defaults to 60,000. Congestion avoidance is entered 
when 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 exceeds 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ, with 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 increased upon receipt of 
acknowledgments.
TCP delayed acknowledgments reduce acknowledgment traffic, with 
a maximum delay of 500 ms and at least one acknowledgment per two 
full-sized segments [172]. In VxWorks, the default delay is 200 ms, and 
acknowledgments may be sent immediately upon receiving a segment 
with the push (PSH) flag.
Fast retransmit and fast recovery cooperate to reduce loss recov
ery time. If loss is not detected through duplicate acknowledgments, 
RFC 6298 specifies a minimum retransmission timeout of one sec
ond [173], which is configurable in VxWorks. Upon detecting loss, 
either via timeout or three duplicate acknowledgments, the sender 
updates 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ as defined in Eq. (2). 
 
 𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ = 𝑚𝑎𝑥( 𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠𝐼𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
2
, 𝑚𝑠𝑠 ×2)
(2)
The 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 is updated upon loss detection, with the new value depending 
on the detection method. A retransmission timeout resets 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 to 𝑚𝑠𝑠, 
while loss detected via duplicate acknowledgments sets 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 to the 
updated 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ+3⋅𝑚𝑠𝑠. RFC 5681 specifies these mechanisms; where 
alternatives exist, the VxWorks variant is described [172]. Algorithm 1 
summarizes this behavior.
RFC 6298 defines retransmission timeout derivation from round
trip time measurements and recommends rounding timeouts below one 
second up to one second [173]. In VxWorks, the default minimum 
retransmission timeout is one second and is configurable. This rounding 
carries ‘‘SHOULD’’ significance [174], and the retransmission timeout 
is doubled after each timeout-based retransmission, as specified.
6.2. SCTP in vxworks
The VxWorks 24.03 SCTP implementation follows RFC 4960 and 
supports RFC 3873 and the SCTP socket API draft RFC 6458 [132,175
177]. This section focuses on implementation factors that affect transfer 
time.
Unlike TCP, SCTP is packet-oriented and supports multiple streams, 
with packets carrying multiple chunks. As in TCP, the receiver adver
tises window credit via 𝑎𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑, which in VxWorks equals the socket 
receive buffer and defaults to 60,000 bytes. SCTP supports delayed 
acknowledgments, sent for at least every other packet and delayed 
by at most 200 ms by default, with immediate acknowledgments for 
15 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Algorithm 1 TCP congestion control in VxWorks.
⊳ Initial variable values.
1: 𝑚𝑠𝑠 ← 1420
2: 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 60000
⊳ Peer announced 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 (60000 bytes)
3: 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 2∗𝑚𝑠𝑠
4: 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ ← 65535
⊳ For every received acknowledgment of new data.
5: if 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 <= 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ then 
6: 
 
 𝑤𝑛𝑑 ←𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 +𝑚𝑠𝑠
7: else
⊳ Slow start.
⊳ Congestion avoidance.
8: 
 
 𝑤𝑛𝑑 ←𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 +((𝑚𝑠𝑠2)∕𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑)
9: end if
⊳ Packet loss congestion window handling.
10: if 𝑆𝑒𝑔𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑡 then 
11: 
12: 
13: 
14: 
15: 
16: 
⊳ Segment loss detected.
𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ ← 𝑚𝑎𝑥((𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠𝐼𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡∕2),𝑚𝑠𝑠 ∗ 2)
if 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑦𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 then
𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ +3 ∗ 𝑚𝑠𝑠
else
𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑚𝑠𝑠
end if
17: end if
⊳ Retransmission timeout.
duplicate chunks; VxWorks sends immediate acknowledgments when 
any duplicates are detected. Upon acknowledgment, 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 is updated 
as 𝑎𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 minus unacknowledged bytes.
SCTP uses the 𝑇3-𝑟𝑡𝑥 timer, derived from round-trip time. Before 
estimation, 𝑇3-𝑟𝑡𝑥 is set to 𝑅𝑇𝑂.𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙, and values below 𝑅𝑇𝑂.𝑀𝑖𝑛
are rounded up [175]. RFC 4960 recommends 𝑅𝑇𝑂.𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 = 3 second 
and 𝑅𝑇𝑂.𝑀𝑖𝑛 = 1 second, which are the VxWorks defaults.
Messages may require fragmentation to fit within the path Maxi
mum Transmission Unit (MTU), denoted 𝑚𝑡𝑢; VxWorks supports sender
side fragmentation as mandated by RFC 4960. SCTP congestion control 
is based on RFC 5681 and includes SACK with gap blocks, counting 
gap-acknowledged chunks as in-flight data until cumulatively acknowl
edged. SCTP maintains 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 and 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ per destination address.
The initial 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 is at most 4 × 𝑚𝑡𝑢, and 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ is arbitrary per 
RFC 4960; in VxWorks, 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ is set to the peer’s receiver window. 
Slow start applies when 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ≤ 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ, increasing 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 based on 
newly acknowledged bytes up to 𝑚𝑡𝑢; out-of-order acknowledgments 
do not increase 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑, although VxWorks does not verify full 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑
utilization. Congestion avoidance applies when 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 > 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ, using 
 
 𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 to increment 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 by 𝑚𝑡𝑢 once it reaches or exceeds 
 
 𝑤𝑛𝑑. Upon loss detection, 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ is updated according to Eq. (3). 
 
 𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ = 𝑚𝑎𝑥( 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑
2 ,𝑚𝑡𝑢× 4)
(3)
Depending on how the loss is detected, 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 is updated slightly 
differently. If the loss is detected by acknowledgment information, 
 
 𝑤𝑛𝑑 is set to 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ, and in case of expiration of 𝑇3-𝑟𝑡𝑥, it is set to 
 
 𝑡𝑢. The above is how VxWorks handles the slow start and congestion 
avoidance to comply with RFC 4960, summarized in Algorithm 2 [175].
Similar to TCP, SCTP quickly acknowledges lost data. When a 
receiver detects lost data, it directly sends an acknowledgment to 
the sender, making the sender aware of the loss. Correspondingly, 
when an acknowledgment indicates loss, the sender waits for three 
acknowledgments that indicate loss before retransmitting the lost data.
6.3. Evaluation setup: TCP/SCTP state transfer
To test TCP and SCTP performance in the state transfer use case, 
we developed an evaluation application that transfers a configurable 
amount of state data and waits for the receiver to acknowledge its 
reception. Algorithm 3 summarizes the evaluation application. The
Sender function runs on the sending node (representing the primary), 
Algorithm 2 VxWorks SCTP congestion control.
⊳ Initial variable values
1: 𝑚𝑡𝑢 ← 1500
2: 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑎_𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑
⊳ Peer announced 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑 (60000 bytes)
3: 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑚𝑖𝑛(4 ∗ 𝑚𝑡𝑢,𝑚𝑎𝑥(2 ∗ 𝑚𝑡𝑢,4380))
4: 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ ← 𝑟𝑤𝑛𝑑
⊳ 𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 is short for 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙_𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑
5: 𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 ← 0
⊳ For every received acknowledgement.
6: if 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 <= 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ then 
7: 
8: 
if 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑆𝑒𝑞 then
𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ←𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 +𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑎𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠,𝑚𝑡𝑢)
end if
9: 
10: else
if 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐴𝑑𝑣𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑆𝑒𝑞 then
11: 
12: 
13: 
14: 
15: 
16: 
17: 
18: end if
𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 +𝑎𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠
if 𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 >= 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 then
𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ←𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 +𝑚𝑡𝑢
𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 ← 𝑝𝑏_𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 −𝑚𝑡𝑢
end if
end if
⊳ Packet loss congestion window handling.
19: if 𝑃𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑡 then 
20: 
21: 
22: 
23: 
 
 𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ ← 𝑚𝑎𝑥((𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑∕2),𝑚𝑡𝑢 ∗ 4)
if 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑𝐵𝑦𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 then
𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑠𝑠𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ
else
⊳ Slow start.
⊳ Congestion avoidance.
⊳ Packet loss detected.
⊳ Retransmission (T3-rtx) timeout.
24: 
25: 
 
 𝑤𝑛𝑑 ← 𝑚𝑡𝑢
end if
26: end if
while the Receiver function runs on the receiving node (representing 
the backup); see Fig.  6.
Algorithm 3 State transfer benchmark application.
1: function Sender
2: 
3: 
4: 
5: 
6: 
7: 
8: 
9: 
10: 
11: 
12: 
 
 𝑛𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 ← 0
while 𝑠𝑛𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 < 𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑇𝑜𝑅𝑢𝑛 do
if 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝐸𝑎𝑐ℎ𝐼𝑡 𝑂𝑅 𝑖𝑠𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡𝐼𝑡 then
𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 ←ConnectToReceiver( )
end if
𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 ← GetTime( )
SendAllData(𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡)
WaitForAck(𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡)
𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒𝑑𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 ← GetTime( )−𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
𝑠𝑛𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 ← 𝑠𝑛𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 + 1
end while
13: end function
14: function Receiver
15: 
16: 
17: 
18: 
19: 
20: 
21: 
22: 
23: 
 
 𝑐𝑣𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 ← 0
while 𝑟𝑐𝑣𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 < 𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑇𝑜𝑅𝑢𝑛 do
if 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝐸𝑎𝑐ℎ𝐼𝑡 𝑂𝑅 𝑖𝑠𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡𝐼𝑡 then
𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 ←AcceptConnectionFromSender( )
end if
RecieveAllData(𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡)
SendAck(𝑠𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡)
𝑟𝑐𝑣𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 ← 𝑟𝑐𝑣𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 + 1
end while
24: end function
We measure transfer time for various data sizes using either a Single 
Connection (SC) for all transfers or a new connection for each transfer, 
16 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 13
TCP and SCTP state transfer evaluation cases.
 Size Connection First Drop Last Drop Middle Drop 
 128B Both Both Both No  256B Both Both Both No  512B Both Both Both No  1KB Both Both Both No  2KB Both Both Both No  5KB Both Both Both No  10KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  25KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  50KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  100KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  250KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  500KB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10  1MB Both Both Both 0,1,5,10 
Table 14
VxWorks TCP and SCTP configurations.
 Parameter Default setting Optimized setting 
 Min. retransmission tmo. One second One millisecond  Max delayed ack. 200 ms One millisecond  Force immediate ack. Two packets One packets 
i.e., Multiple Connections (MC). The connection strategy affects the 
transfer times since 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 grows with each successful transfer.
Additionally, we measure transfer time under different loss condi
tions. Note that TCP and SCTP use different terminology: TCP refers to 
segments, while SCTP refers to packets. In the following, we use the 
term ‘‘packet’’ for both, with the understanding that when referring to 
TCP, a packet means a segment. We consider three loss scenarios: (i) 
loss of the first packet, (ii) loss of the last packet, and (iii) loss of middle 
packets. The rationale behind selecting these cases is explained below.
As discussed in Sections 6.1and6.2, transfer times increase when 
losses are not detected by fast retransmission. Loss of the first or last 
packet forces reliance on a retransmission timeout, whereas loss of 
a middle packet is typically handled by fast retransmission and fast 
recovery. To illustrate timeout behavior, we also simulate increasing 
numbers of lost middle packets, noting that retransmission timeouts 
are triggered when losses exceed fast-recovery capabilities and that 
timeouts double after each occurrence for both TCP and SCTP.
Loss of the first and last packets represents edge cases, while con
secutive middle-packet losses simulate burst loss. Losses due to queue 
overflow on overutilized paths are considered configuration faults and 
are outside the scope of this work.
Table  13 summarizes the evaluation cases, listing data sizes, eval
uated connection types (SC, MC, or both), and loss scenarios for first, 
last, and middle packets, which are not combined within a single test. 
Middle-packet losses are evaluated only for data sizes of 10 kB or more, 
where middle packets exist, assuming a packet size of approximately 
1.5 kB. Each test is executed for 100 iterations, recording minimum, 
maximum, and average transfer times.
VxWorks allows customization of SCTP and TCP parameters; there
fore, we evaluate two configurations per protocol: default and loss
recovery optimized, as summarized in Table  14. The minimum retrans
mission timeout follows RFC 6298 and RFC 4960, defaulting to one 
second for both protocols [173,175]; in the optimized configuration, 
it is reduced to 1 ms. The maximum delayed acknowledgment time is 
reduced from the default 200 ms to 1 ms, and the acknowledgment 
threshold is lowered from two packets to one to prevent delayed 
acknowledgments.
These optimizations may introduce system-level side effects, such 
as increased CPU utilization. Evaluating such effects and the generaliz
ability of these settings across implementations and operating systems 
is left to future work.
Fig.  6 illustrates the evaluation setup, where the simulated redun
dant controller pair connects over a switched 1 Gbps Ethernet with one 
Fig. 6. The evaluation setup used.
Fig. 7. TCP—no losses, maximum transfer time, with default (D) or optimized 
(O) settings and either Single Connection (SC) or Multiple Connections (MC).
Fig. 8. SCTP—no losses, maximum transfer time, with default (D) or opti
mized (O) settings and either Single Connection (SC) or Multiple Connections 
(MC).
Fig. 9. TCP—loss of first segment, maximum transfer time, with default (D) 
or optimized (O) settings using either Single Connection (SC) or Multiple 
Connections (MC).
switch between. DCN 1 represents the primary and runs the sender part 
of the application, and DCN 2 is the receiver as described in Algorithm 
3. The OS on the DCN is VxWorks 24.03, and each DCN is a mini-PC 
with 2 GHz Intel I7-9700T, with 16 GB RAM (see Fig.  10).
6.4. Performance results: TCP/SCTP state transfer
Tables  15and16 detail the measured transfer times for the eval
uation scenarios summarized in Table  13. The theoretical limit for 1 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
17 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 10. SCTP—loss of first segment, maximum transfer time, with default 
(D) or optimized (O) settings using either Single Connection (SC) or Multiple 
Connections (MC).
Gbps Ethernet is 125 MB/second, or 8 ms to transfer 1 MB. As shown 
in Fig.  7 and Table  15, the default TCP transfer with a single connection 
approaches this theoretical maximum throughput, transferring 1 MB in 
less than 10 ms, overhead excluded. However, the optimized version’s 
throughput is lower, as depicted in Fig.  7. Nevertheless, when packet 
losses occur, the optimized version significantly outperforms the default 
settings, as presented in Fig.  9 and detailed in Table  15.
For SCTP, as shown in Fig.  8 and detailed in Table  16, the optimized 
version offers better performance even in scenarios without packet 
losses. Generally, SCTP performance is not as good as TCP. However, 
both the optimized SCTP and the optimized TCP exhibit recovery times 
exceeding one second; TCP only does so when losing ten packets for 
10 kB of data. In other words, it is a relatively extreme loss situation. 
One potential reason for the lower SCTP performance is the hardcoded 
SCTP progression tick time of 200 ms.
For TCP and SCTP, the longest recovery time occurs in scenarios 
with a single connection where ten consecutive packets are lost. This 
result is due to the cumulative reduction in the congestion window 
(𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑) caused by repeated packet losses on the same connection and 
the increased retransmission timeout when resends are triggered by 
timeout. The results confirm that losing the first or last packets presents 
significant problems for TCP and SCTP. Although optimization substan
tially improves results for both protocols, SCTP still shows a maximum 
transfer time of around 200 ms when the first or last packet is lost, 
compared to approximately 20 ms for TCP.
Additionally, the optimized TCP version shows transfer times ex
ceeding 600 ms during scenarios with multiple packet losses, as consec
utive losses reduce the 𝑐𝑤𝑛𝑑 and increase the retransmission timeout.
6.5. Conclusions from experimental evaluation
With default settings, internal TCP and SCTP recovery mechanisms 
can extend transfer times by several seconds in the presence of packet 
losses. However, the recovery times are reducible by applying the op
timizations described in Table  14. The optimized TCP version’s results 
indicate that it typically requires several consecutive packet losses to 
affect transfer time significantly.
The likelihood of consecutive packet losses might be acceptably 
low, especially when redundant networks are employed for state data 
exchanges. However, TCP does not offer prioritization, and if a single 
TCP connection is used for all state transfers, one application’s data 
transfer might block another, especially under loss [124]. Additionally, 
TCP optimizations in VxWorks are implemented at the kernel config
uration level, influencing all TCP connections. Preferably, it would be 
handled as for SCTP on the socket level, only impacting the connection 
for which the optimization is needed. As mentioned earlier, deviations 
from the standard one-second minimum timeout should be thoroughly 
understood, which is easier if only applied to certain connections [174].
Conclusions:
Fig. 11. RSTP high-level overview.
• Utilizing VxWorks TCP/SCTP stack parameters adjustment possi
bility significantly reduces retransmission latency versus defaults.
• TCP outperforms SCTP in transfer time across the tested scenarios.
• With default parameters, even a single lost packet can push 
retransmission time into the seconds range.
• With optimization, isolated losses improve, but burst losses still 
drive retransmission time back into the seconds range.
• The resulting loss-induced tail in transfer time damages pre
dictability, making these protocols ill-suited for deadline-bound 
state transfer.
7. Proposed state-transfer protocol
As shown in Section 5, numerous protocols exist; however, none 
satisfy all desired features for state transfer in industrial controller 
redundancy. This section therefore presents a protocol that meets these 
desired features. The desired real-time features are fulfilled through de
terministic behavior independent of loss occurrence, combined with a 
channel-based concept that enables schedulable transfers. Reliability is 
ensured through bounded retransmissions based on a reliability model, 
without compromising predictability. The protocol design further al
lows flexible integration of security mechanisms, thereby addressing 
the desired security features.
Section 7.1 provides an overview of the protocol, while Sections 7.2
and 7.3 detail its operation. Section 7.4 presents the software design 
and illustrates protocol execution using internal components. Security 
aspects are discussed in Section 7.5, and Section 7.6 concludes by 
motivating how the proposed protocol fulfills the features identified in 
Section 5.
7.1. Protocol overview
The protocol we propose is a transport-layer protocol named Re
liable State Transfer Protocol (RSTP). Similar to RBUDP (see Sec
tion 5.6.2) and PA-UDP (see Section 5.6.3), RSTP comprises a commu
nication protocol for the actual data exchange and an additional mech
anism for exchanging related metadata. In the case of RSTP, the RSTP 
Payload Protocol (RSTP-PP) handles the data exchange, while the time
insensitive information used by RSTP-PP is managed by the RSTP Man
agement Mechanism (RSTP-MM). RSTP-MM is described as a mecha
nism rather than a protocol, leaving its implementation open to suit 
specific deployment requirements, as further discussed in Section 7.3.
The novel part of RSTP is that it utilizes a channel concept for 
scheduling and a resend budget to provide known reliability based 
on a pre-determined number of resends, a capability not present in 
any of the protocols described in Section 5. Fig.  11 presents a high
level overview of RSTP, and the subsections that follow provide fur
ther details, where Section 7.2.2 describes the channel concept and 
Section 7.2.4 the reliability-related resend budget concept.
18 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 15
TCP transfer times (ms) with minimum, average, and maximum values under packet loss scenarios.
 Size No Loss First pkt. lost Last pkt. lost 1 mid pkt. lost 5 mid pkts. lost 10 mid pkts. lost
 Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max 
 Default settings—Single connection
 128 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 888.9 998.9 1E3 899.8 999.0 1E3–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 892.9 998.9 1E3 899.8 999.0 1E3–––––––––  512 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 880.9 998.8 1E3 833.8 998.3 1E3–––––––––  1 kB 0.1 0.1 0.2 888.9 998.9 1E3 825.8 998.2 1E3–––––––––  2 kB 0.1 0.1 0.2 998.9 1E3 1E3 949.8 999.5 1E3–––––––––  5 kB 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 9.0 876.0 982.8 999.8 1E3–––––––––  10 kB 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 9.5 908.1 995.8 999.9 1E3 0.5 988.9 1E3 1E3 3E3 3E3 6.3E4 1.2E5 1.2E5  25 kB 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 49.5 995.8 917.8 999.1 1E3 0.6 0.7 0.8 994.3 999.9 1E3 1.5E4 6.2E4 6.3E4  50 kB 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.8 10.0 899.9 898.8 999.0 1E3 0.8 1.0 1.1 0.9 990.7 1E3 978.8 1.5E4 1.5E4  100 kB 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.0 10.9 912.5 898.8 999.0 1E3 1.2 1.5 2.4 1.2 1E3 7E3 1.3 3E3 3E3  250 kB 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.3 12.8 904.2 996.8 1E3 1E3 2.7 3.0 4.1 2.5 2.6 3.2 3.1 625.5 3E3  500 kB 4.5 4.5 4.6 4.5 16.0 893.4 893.8 998.9 1E3 5.0 6.4 9.8 4.8 64.2 989.0 4.6 94.3 7E3  1 MB 9.0 9.1 9.2 9.3 23.6 1E3 889.8 998.9 1E3 9.6 12.8 18.7 10.9 21.4 942.9 9.1 1.4E3 1.2E5 
 Default settings—Many connections
 128 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 890.9 998.8 1E3 899.9 998.9 1E3–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 899.9 998.9 1E3 909.9 999.0 999.9–––––––––  512 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 975.9 999.7 1E3 889.9 998.8 999.9–––––––––  1 kB 0.1 0.2 0.2 973.9 999.7 1E3 899.9 998.9 999.9–––––––––  2 kB 0.1 0.2 0.2 990.0 999.9 1E3 859.8 998.5 999.9–––––––––  5 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 987.0 999.9 1E3 899.9 998.9 999.9–––––––––  10 kB 0.3 0.3 0.3 957.1 999.7 1E3 899.8 998.9 999.9 0.4 0.5 0.5 1E3 1E3 1E3 6.3E4 6.3E4 6.3E4  25 kB 0.4 0.4 0.5 890.5 999.4 1E3 934.9 999.2 999.9 0.6 0.6 0.6 901.3 999.4 1E3 1.5E4 1.5E4 1.5E4  50 kB 0.6 0.7 0.7 802.9 998.0 1E3 901.8 998.9 1E3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 999.8 999.9 1E3  100 kB 1.1 1.1 1.2 920.6 999.8 1E3 897.8 998.9 1E3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.6  250 kB 2.4 2.4 2.5 919.2 999.4 1E3 998.9 999.9 1E3 2.6 2.7 3.3 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.6 3.0 3.1  500 kB 4.6 4.6 4.7 915.5 999.6 1E3 999.9 999.9 999.9 5.0 5.0 6.2 5.5 5.7 7.4 5.7 5.7 5.8  1 MB 9.2 9.2 9.3 942.2 999.5 1E3 898.8 999.0 1E3 9.5 9.7 12.6 11.3 11.5 15.5 11.4 11.4 11.5 
 Optimized settings—Single connection
 128 B 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.0–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.1 3.3 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.0–––––––––  512 B 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.0–––––––––  1 kB 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.1–––––––––  2 kB 0.1 0.1 3.3 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.1–––––––––  5 kB 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 1.1 0.8 1.0 1.0–––––––––  10 kB 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 1.1 0.8 1.0 1.0 0.4 1.0 1.1 1.2 3.0 3.0 99.9 215.3 5.3E3  25 kB 0.3 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.6 1.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.3 15.4 62.2 63.1  50 kB 0.5 0.8 4.2 0.6 1.0 2.0 0.8 1.9 2.1 0.8 1.0 1.9 0.9 3.3 18.5 1.4 39.9 335.0  100 kB 0.9 1.6 2.5 1.4 1.9 2.7 1.1 1.9 4.1 1.2 1.8 4.0 1.4 2.8 12.0 1.4 57.9 497.1  250 kB 3.3 4.1 5.7 3.3 4.0 6.6 3.4 4.3 6.5 3.1 4.1 6.2 3.1 5.0 22.4 3.2 46.6 645.6  500 kB 6.4 8.0 11.0 6.5 7.8 12.0 6.1 8.4 12.2 6.5 8.0 11.7 6.4 8.5 18.6 6.6 23.9 455.7  1 MB 12.8 14.9 22.4 13.0 15.4 24.3 13.1 15.3 23.1 13.0 16.1 23.4 13.2 15.9 31.0 13.5 60.5 628.3 
 Optimized settings—Many connections
 128 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.9–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.9 1.0–––––––––  512 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.9–––––––––  1 kB 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.9–––––––––  2 kB 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.9–––––––––  5 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.0 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.9 0.9–––––––––  10 kB 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 1.9 2.2 63.2 203.8 5.9E3  25 kB 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.6 1.6 1.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.3 1.4 1.4 15.4 15.5 18.7  50 kB 0.6 0.7 0.7 1.8 2.0 2.2 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0 2.7 3.6 3.8  100 kB 1.2 1.3 1.4 2.6 2.9 3.3 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4  250 kB 3.2 4.0 5.0 4.7 5.6 6.6 3.3 4.1 4.9 3.2 4.2 5.2 3.2 3.6 5.0 3.1 3.7 4.7  500 kB 6.4 7.7 10.2 7.8 10.2 12.2 6.8 8.2 10.4 6.8 7.7 17.3 6.4 8.1 22.4 6.9 67.3 316.6  1 MB 13.3 15.2 21.6 14.3 18.2 23.6 13.5 15.9 22.8 13.4 15.6 21.5 13.4 15.4 28.1 13.2 36.7 198.7 
7.2. Payload protocol—RSTP-PP
RSTP-PP targets the transfer of internal state data for controller 
applications in a standby redundancy context. The protocol utilizes 
a channel concept to allow the transfer of each application state to 
be scheduled and handled independently. The fact that a controller 
typically hosts multiple applications with different cycle times and state 
transfer requirements, as previously explained in Section 2, motivates 
the channel concept, further elaborated in Section 7.2.2. Typically, an 
RSTP-PP deployment consists of one sender and one receiver, where 
the sender is the primary controller sending to the receiver, the backup 
controller. However, mixing is allowed.
7.2.1. Packet format
RSTP-PP is a packet-oriented protocol, and Table  17 shows the data 
packet header layout. 𝐻𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒 and 𝐻𝑉𝑒𝑟 specify the header type and 
the version of the packet header. 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 is the identity of the channel; 
the concept of channels is further described in Section 7.2.2. Note that 
the 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 must be unique within an RSTP-PP communication, but the 
protocol does not specify how to allocate the channel identities.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
19 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 16
SCTP transfer times (ms) with minimum, average, and maximum values under packet loss scenarios.
 Size No Loss First pkt. lost Last pkt. lost 1 mid pkt. lost 5 mid pkts. lost 10 mid pkts. lost
 Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max 
 Default settings—Single connection
 128 B 0.2 197.7 200.0 940.5 999.4 1.1E3 999.9 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  256 B 0.2 197.6 200.0 942.4 1.1E3 2.1E3 899.5 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  512 B 0.2 197.6 200.0 939.5 1E3 2.1E3 999.9 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  1 kB 0.2 197.6 200.0 943.6 999.4 1.1E3 899.6 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  2 kB 0.2 1.8 155.5 944.2 1.1E3 2.1E3 999.9 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  5 kB 0.2 1.9 162.9 0.3 491.0 1.1E3 999.9 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  10 kB 0.3 2.0 162.5 0.4 493.0 999.6 999.9 1E3 1.3E3 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.2E3 1.4E3 3.6E3 6.3E4 6.3E4 6.4E4  25 kB 0.6 199.0 295.4 0.7 591.0 999.9 913.6 1.1E3 1.4E3 100.0 199.0 200.0 1.0 1.5E3 1.6E3 3.1E4 6.3E4 6.4E4  50 kB 0.7 1.6 85.2 1.2 491.0 998.8 999.9 1E3 1.3E3 100.1 199.0 200.0 1.4 1.3E3 1.4E3 499.9 6.2E4 6.4E4  100 kB 6.0 196.9 200.0 2.3 540.0 999.9 999.9 1E3 1.2E3 199.9 203.0 400.0 200.0 1.5E3 1.6E3 1.5 6.2E4 6.4E4  250 kB 2.5 96.9 200.0 5.5 548.9 1.2E3 1E3 1.1E3 1.2E3 2.8 140.9 279.1 2.8 201.0 1E3 2.8 1.7E4 3.1E4  500 kB 4.8 100.9 200.0 9.2 535.0 999.9 897.7 1E3 1.4E3 5.3 118.9 380.5 5.2 289.0 1.8E3 6.5 4.9E4 1.8E5  1 MB 9.6 96.9 360.9 22.6 528.9 999.9 845.7 1E3 1.2E3 10.0 108.1 400.0 18.1 309.4 1.4E3 99.8 2.2E5 2.3E5 
 Default settings—Many connections
 128 B 0.2 0.2 0.2 999.6 1E3 1.1E3 999.6 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  256 B 0.2 0.2 0.2 899.6 998.6 999.7 999.6 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  512 B 0.2 0.2 3.4 999.6 1E3 1E3 999.6 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  1 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 999.7 1E3 1.1E3 999.6 1E3 1.1E3–––––––––  2 kB 73.6 198.3 199.6 899.7 998.7 999.7 999.6 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  5 kB 199.9 200.7 271.0 0.2 0.3 0.3 999.6 1.1E3 1.4E3–––––––––  10 kB 61.5 198.2 199.6 0.4 161.4 200.5 999.6 1.1E3 1.3E3 0.4 0.5 0.6 3.2E3 3.5E3 3.8E3 6.3E4 6.4E4 6.4E4  25 kB 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.8 899.7 998.7 999.7 200.0 201.0 300.0 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.5E4 3E4 3.1E4  50 kB 0.8 194.5 224.3 1.1 177.4 200.4 899.7 1.1E3 1.2E3 0.9 193.2 200.2 100.0 199.0 200.0 299.6 398.5 399.6  100 kB 1.3 1.4 1.4 2.0 4.2 201.4 899.7 998.7 999.7 1.4 157.1 300.1 1.4 57.3 389.8 1.5 1.5 1.6  250 kB 2.6 97.0 300.0 4.6 144.8 299.8 899.7 1.1E3 1.4E3 2.8 71.0 200.0 2.8 95.0 294.9 2.9 79.0 199.9  500 kB 4.9 103.2 400.5 8.9 111.3 372.3 999.6 1.1E3 1.4E3 5.1 99.3 200.4 5.1 117.2 395.3 5.2 111.3 370.4  1 MB 9.7 103.2 390.1 17.9 101.6 400.4 999.7 1.1E3 1.2E3 10.1 107.8 389.9 10.1 118.5 369.9 10.2 79.2 389.5 
 Optimized settings—Single connection
 128 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 41.5 198.4 200.0 99.5 199.0 200.0–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 80.5 198.8 201.0 99.5 199.0 200.0–––––––––  512 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 78.6 198.8 200.0 99.5 199.0 200.0–––––––––  1 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 78.5 198.8 200.0 99.5 199.0 200.0–––––––––  2 kB 0.2 0.2 0.3 77.6 198.7 200.0 99.5 199.0 200.0–––––––––  5 kB 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 39.5 198.4 200.0–––––––––  10 kB 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 52.5 198.5 200.0 0.4 0.5 0.5 339.8 399.4 400.1 1.5E3 1.6E3 1.6E3  25 kB 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 123.5 199.2 200.0 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 393.7 400.0 300.0 1.6E3 1.6E3  50 kB 0.7 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 78.6 198.8 200.0 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.0 389.1 400.1 1.3 1.6E3 1.6E3  100 kB 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.8 2.2 2.4 175.5 199.7 200.0 1.4 2.0 2.2 1.5 385.6 400.1 1.7 1.6E3 1.6E3  250 kB 2.7 2.8 2.9 4.1 5.1 5.3 173.6 199.7 200.0 3.2 4.6 5.2 3.2 189.6 200.3 3.2 4.5E3 6.4E3  500 kB 5.2 5.4 5.6 7.9 10.0 10.2 192.5 199.9 200.0 5.8 8.7 9.9 5.7 175.8 201.2 6.1 991.9 1.2E3  1 MB 10.6 13.8 20.4 15.8 19.9 20.5 199.9 200.1 209.6 11.4 18.0 20.4 11.8 150.9 202.6 11.4 904.4 1.2E3 
 Optimized settings—Many connections
 128 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 99.6 198.6 199.7 99.6 198.6 199.7–––––––––  256 B 0.1 0.2 0.2 99.7 198.6 199.7 99.6 198.6 199.7–––––––––  512 B 0.2 0.2 0.2 99.6 198.7 199.7 99.6 198.7 199.7–––––––––  1 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 99.7 198.7 199.7 99.6 198.7 199.7–––––––––  2 kB 0.2 0.2 0.2 99.7 198.7 199.7 99.6 198.7 199.7–––––––––  5 kB 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 99.7 198.7 199.7–––––––––  10 kB 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 99.6 198.7 199.7 0.4 0.5 0.6 300.0 399.0 400.1 1.5E3 1.6E3 1.6E3  25 kB 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 99.7 198.7 199.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.8 0.8 300.1 399.2 400.2  50 kB 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 99.6 198.7 199.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0 5.7 1.2 1.2 1.3  100 kB 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.9 99.7 198.7 199.7 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 4.8 1.6 1.7 1.8  250 kB 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.0 4.1 4.3 99.6 198.7 199.7 2.8 3.1 3.9 3.0 3.1 4.0 3.1 7.2 202.8  500 kB 5.2 5.4 5.6 7.8 8.0 8.2 99.7 198.7 199.8 5.5 5.7 5.9 5.6 5.8 7.6 5.7 6.0 7.0  1 MB 10.5 10.8 11.4 15.4 16.0 16.4 99.6 198.7 199.7 11.1 11.4 15.2 11.2 11.5 11.8 11.2 17.6 409.7 
The next field in the data packet header, as shown in Table  17, is 
 
 𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒, the transfer cycle, a steadily incrementing number for each 
transfer cycle. A transfer cycle begins when the first packet for a 
channel is sent and ends when the receiver has acknowledged all pack
ets or the deadline expires. The channel description in Section 7.2.2 
introduces the concept of deadlines.
Following the 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 is 𝑆𝑒𝑞𝑁𝑜, the sequence number within a 
 
 𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒, and 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑. The sequence number starts at zero for every new 
cycle, and the receiver uses the sequence number to order received 
packets. The sequence number, combined with the 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐 and the 
RSTP-PP payload size, allows the receiver to calculate the byte offset 
for each incoming packet and store the received data in a contiguous 
buffer. Section 7.3 explains the RSTP-PP payload size.
𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐 is the total number of payload bytes to transfer in this 
channel during this 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒; header size excluded. It remains constant 
throughout the 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒. 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐 is included in each packet to allow 
the size to change without additional communication to the receiver. 
Even if the first message is lost, the receiver can allocate a reception 
buffer for the whole message.
𝐸𝑥𝑝𝐼𝑛𝑀𝑠 is the expiration time in ms. The data in the packet is 
valid for the specified number of ms. The sender updates 𝐸𝑥𝑝𝐼𝑛𝑀𝑠 im
mediately before passing the packet to the network stack. The receiver 
should use the shortest expiration time received for the 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 and 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
20 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 17
RSTP-PP—data packet header.
 Name Bytes Value Description 
 𝐻𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒 2 0 × 0001 Header and message type  𝐻𝑉𝑒𝑟 2 1 Header version  𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 2 [1,216−1] Channel identity  𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 2 [0,216−1] Transfer cycle  𝑆𝑒𝑞𝑁𝑜 2 [0,216−1] Sequence number  𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐 4 [0,232−1] Total number of payload bytes in this cycle  𝐸𝑥𝑝𝐼𝑛𝑀𝑠 2 [0,216−1] Expiration time, in milliseconds  𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ 2 [1,216−1] Force acknowledgment from specified channel 
Table 18
RSTP-PP—acknowledgment header.
 Name Bytes Value Description 
 𝐻𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒 2 0 × 1001 Header and message type  𝐻𝑉𝑒𝑟 2 1 Header version  𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 2 [1,216−1] Channel identity  𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 2 [0,216−1] Transfer cycle  𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠 1 [0,150] Number (𝑖) of acknowledgment ranges that follow  𝐿𝑜𝑤𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖 2 [0,216−1] Lowest received sequence number for 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 and 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 in acknowledgment range 𝑖  𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖 2 [0,216−1] Highest received sequence number for 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 and 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 in acknowledgment range 𝑖 
 
 𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒. Although the time-stamping occurs at the application level, it 
is deemed accurate enough for the purpose, which is to prevent the 
backup from using expired data, as described in Section 2. If needed, 
more sophisticated mechanisms can be designed and incorporated, 
which is deemed future work.
The last field in the header is 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ, which forces the receiver to 
acknowledge the specified channel. When a receiver receives a packet 
where 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ≠0 and 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ is a valid channel identity known by 
the receiver, the receiver must send the current packet reception status 
for the specified channel. After 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ, the last field in the header, is 
the payload data.
Table  18 shows the acknowledgment packet layout, and the follow
ing describes RSTP-PP acknowledgment fields.
𝐻𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒 and 𝐻𝑉𝑒𝑟 specify the type of acknowledgment and version, 
similar to the data packet. 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 and 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 indicate which transfer 
cycle and channel the acknowledgment is for. Next is 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠, which 
specifies the number of acknowledgment blocks in the acknowledg
ment. An acknowledgment acknowledging a complete reception of all 
channel packets for one transfer cycle has an 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠 value of one. 
For each non-consecutive missing sequence number, 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠 will 
increase by one since there will be one more 𝐿𝑜𝑤𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖
 pair 
in the header. Defined as follows: 𝑁 is the total number of packets 
in a transfer cycle, with sequence numbers {0,1,…,𝑁−1} and 𝑅⊆
{0,1,…,𝑁−1} is the set of sequence numbers of packets received, 
arranged in increasing order:
𝑟0<𝑟1<⋯<𝑟𝑚−1, where 𝑚=|𝑅|.
The sequence numbers in 𝑅 partitioned into maximal contiguous 
acknowledgment blocks 𝑎𝑏 (i.e., intervals) where 𝐴𝐵 is the set of all 𝑎𝑏
and in one 𝑎𝑏 consecutive numbers differ by 1, ∀𝑎𝑏𝑖∈𝐴𝐵 and any two 
successive elements 𝑟𝑗,𝑟𝑗+1 ∈𝑎𝑏𝑖
 where 𝑟𝑗+1 =𝑟𝑗+1 and if 𝑟𝑗 ∈𝑎𝑏𝑖
𝑟𝑗+1 ∉𝑎𝑏𝑖
 then 𝑟𝑗+1
 starts a new acknowledgment block. Hence, for 
each acknowledgment block 𝑎𝑏𝑖:
𝐿𝑜𝑤𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖 =min{𝑎𝑏𝑖} and 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝐴𝑐𝑘𝑖 =max{𝑎𝑏𝑖} The number of 
acknowledgment blocks, i.e, is 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠=|𝐴𝐵|.
7.2.2. Channels and scheduling
The purpose of the channels is to serve as schedulable entities 
for state data transfers between various applications running on a 
controller. We utilize Earliest Deadline First (EDF) scheduling, which 
was originally developed for task scheduling and later extended to com
munication channel scheduling by Zheng et al. [178,179]. The RSTP 
channel concept is based on the work of Zheng et al. as summarized 
below [179].
A channel is described by the following tuple ⟨𝐶,𝑇,𝑑⟩, where 𝐶 is 
the transmission time, i.e., the time it takes to transfer the data. 𝑇 is 
the minimum (shortest) interarrival time of new data to be transmitted, 
and 𝑑 is the deadline, denoting the time by which the transfer must be 
completed.
To determine whether a channel is schedulable, we use the check 
for non-preemptive scheduling in a bounded time frame provided by 
Zheng et al. and summarized below [179]. It consists of three steps, 
summarized below: (i) utilization check, (ii) determination of the time 
intervals for utilization check, and (iii) check that deadlines are met for 
all time intervals from step (ii).
For 𝑛 channels, as mentioned, the first check is to verify that the 
utilization does not exceed the physical link capacity. We refer to 
the entire physical or logical path across the network connecting the 
primary and backup controllers as a link.
𝑛 ∑
𝑖=1
𝐶𝑗
𝑇𝑗
≤1
Next is to deduce the time intervals, 𝑆 is the set of time intervals to 
check, defined as:
𝑡max =max
{
𝑑1,…,𝑑𝑛,
𝐶𝑝 +∑𝑛
𝑖=1
(
1−𝑑𝑖
𝑇𝑖
)
𝐶𝑖
1−∑𝑛
𝑖=1
𝐶𝑖
𝑇𝑖
}
.
𝑆=
𝑛 ⋃
𝑖=1
𝑆𝑖, 𝑆𝑖 =
{
𝑑𝑖+𝑛𝑇𝑖 ∶ 𝑛=0,1,…,
⌊𝑡max−𝑑𝑖
𝑇𝑖
⌋}
Third, we perform the offline finite schedulability test as prescribed 
by Zheng et al. [179] that test whether all channels can be transferred 
before the required deadlines, i.e., the deadlines can be met for all 
intervals in 𝑆 and all channels 𝑛.
∀𝑡∈𝑆,
𝑛 ∑
𝑖=1
(⌈𝑡−𝑑𝑖
𝑇𝑖
⌉+
𝐶𝑖
)
+𝐶𝑝 ≤ 𝑡
𝐶𝑝
 is the preemption blocking time faced by the higher priority 
transfer induced by, for example, the operating system or by utilizing 
the link for unscheduled traffic of lower priority.
The schedulability check is performed offline during engineer
ing/configuration using provisioned link and channel parameters (e.g.,
bandwidth, link identifiers, and deadlines), rather than continuous 
runtime network-state probing. Its purpose is to prevent overcommit
ment, ensuring that the system does not promise more transfer capacity 
than it can deliver. Thus, the schedulability-computation overhead is 
incurred mainly at initialization/reconfiguration and amortized over 
normal operation; at runtime, only EDF-based selection of the next 
channel/packet is executed. While transfer time can be approximated 
from data size and available bandwidth, protocol-processing overhead 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
21 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
is implementation- and hardware-dependent; developing a calibrated 
yet non-pessimistic model is left for future work.
The data transferred by RSTP-PP is typically fragmented into multi
ple packets, as state data is often larger than the MTU of the underlying 
link, usually the size of a standard Ethernet frame. Since RSTP-PP is 
designed to be reliable and tolerate packet loss, the transmission time 𝐶
depends not only on the link capacity and the efficiency of the protocol 
implementation, 𝐶 also needs to account for potential retransmissions. 
These aspects are further discussed in Section 7.2.4.
Since each channel consumes buffer memory, the receiver must 
reserve enough for incoming packets. The engineering tool can verify 
that the required buffer memory does not exceed the available memory 
(with a suitable margin). Memory-management optimizations are left to 
future work.
7.2.3. RSTP-PP interaction
This section describes the RSTP-PP protocol interaction between 
the sender and receiver. The sending process begins with the sender 
transmitting a packet belonging to the channel with the earliest dead
line, i.e., the packet designated for transmission according to the EDF 
scheduling scheme. Before sending the first packet for a channel in a 
channel period 𝑇𝑖, 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 is incremented. During the cycle, 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐
must remain constant, allowing the receiver to reserve memory as 
needed upon reception of the first message. The sender can switch 
between sending packets for different channels if a switch is deemed 
suitable by the scheduler. The transmission of 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 for 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 is com
plete when an acknowledgment is received, confirming the reception 
of all packets, i.e., the reception of all payload bytes, or if the deadline 
cannot be met.
To prevent exhausting the receiver, RSTP-PP utilizes a flow control 
mechanism; the number of packets in flight, 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 (unacknowledged 
packets), is limited to be no higher than 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥. Each packet 
sent that is not a retransmission increments 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡. Each received 
acknowledgment confirms that the reception of previously unacknowl
edged packets yields a decrement of 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, with the amount of newly 
acknowledged packets deduced from the received acknowledgment. 
Alternatively, an additional field can be added to the acknowledgment, 
specifically stating the number of received packets, to further simplify 
handling, at the cost of extra bytes in the acknowledgment. RSTP-MM 
provide the initial 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 value, discussed in Section 7.3
Acknowledgments are sent from the receiver to the sender for a 
channel under four conditions: (i) upon reception of the last packet 
for a 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒, (ii) when the number of 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠 increases, (iii) upon 
explicit request from the sender using 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ, and (iv) when the 
limit (𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑈𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑) of unacknowledged packets (𝑢𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑𝐶𝑛𝑡) received 
is reached. The initial value of 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑈𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 is discussed in Section 7.3.
Receiving the final packet, i.e., the one with the highest sequence 
number, completes the transfer if no losses have occurred. Regardless 
of packet loss, the receiver always sends an acknowledgment upon 
receiving the last packet. The second condition is triggered by an 
increment in 𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑠, which indicates reception after a loss (i.e., a 
newly detected gap in contiguous packet reception). The third condi
tion occurs when the sender explicitly requests an acknowledgment 
using 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ, typically when it has sent all packets for a channel 
but has not yet received confirmation of receipt from the receiver. The 
fourth reason acknowledgments are sent is for flow control. Since the 
sender is only allowed to send up to 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 packets without re
ceiving an acknowledgment, the receiver must issue acknowledgments 
at regular intervals if none of the above-mentioned conditions are met. 
This interval is governed by 𝑢𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑𝐶𝑛𝑡 and 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑈𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑, which are 
further detailed in Section 7.3.
As mentioned, the receiver sends an acknowledgment when receiv
ing the last packet. However, acknowledgments, as well as data packets, 
can be susceptible to loss. Hence, the sender typically uses 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ
to request acknowledgment for the channel with the earliest deadline, 
where all packets have been sent but receipt remains unacknowledged, 
if such a channel exists.
When the sender has transmitted all packets for a channel, it starts 
with the next one, as appointed by EDF. If there is no next channel to 
transmit, the last packet is resent until acknowledgment information 
is received or the deadline expires. When the acknowledgment is 
received, it either confirms the reception of all packets or provides 
the information required to determine which packets to retransmit. 
Consequently, while awaiting acknowledgments, unfinished channels 
are served in deadline order with the 𝐹𝐴𝑐𝑘𝐶ℎ set to the identity of the 
channel with the earliest deadline waiting for an acknowledgment.
A sender informed about missing sequence numbers tags those 
packets (or adds them to a resend queue). If the total time left to send 
all packets known not to have been received exceeds the channel’s 
deadline, the sending of that channel aborts for the current 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒.
7.2.4. Fault-tolerance and network redundancy
Redundant controllers are commonly deployed with network re
dundancy to avoid the network becoming a single point of failure. 
Although it is often assumed that redundant controllers are spatially co
located, this is not the case in all deployments. For example, controllers 
for traffic tunnel ventilation systems or marine vessel systems may 
be geographically separated. Consequently, current systems support 
separations of several kilometers, and edge- or cloud-based backups 
are emerging [3,180]. As a result, the communication path between 
a primary and a backup controller can vary significantly depending on 
the deployment and, with that, the likelihood of disturbances.
Gigabit Ethernet IEEE 802.3ab specifies a Bit Error Rate (BER) 
smaller than 10−10, and in controlled environments, a BER as low as 
10−12 is plausible [1,181]. As an example, the above BER span yields, 
for a channel utilizing 100 Mbps of a 1 Gbps link, an hourly frame loss 
between 0.36 and 36 frames of total 30 ∗ 106 frames per hour.
As mentioned, a state transfer typically fragments into several pack
ets and Ethernet frames; without retransmission, the loss of one frame 
would invalidate the entire transfer. A standard Ethernet full-size frame 
is 1518 bytes, or 12144 bits large. If 𝐹 is the number of bits in a full-size 
frame, then the probability that such a frame is transmitted correctly 
is 𝑞𝑠 = (1 −𝐵𝐸𝑅)𝐹, and the probability of failure is 𝑝𝑠 = 1 − 𝑞𝑠
 [182]. 
 
  is the total number of frames (or packets) constituting a fragmented 
message. In the case of redundant links with parallel transmission, as 
for PRP, the probability that at least one of the frames is successfully 
received is 𝑞𝑟 = 1 −𝑝2
𝑠
 and 𝑝𝑟 = 1−𝑞𝑟.
As mentioned, all packets that constitute a message must be re
ceived for the message to be successfully delivered. We assume that 
the packet transmissions are independent and that we can make 𝑅
individual packet retransmissions within the deadline. 𝑅 is the retrans
mission budget. Hence, a message is successfully delivered if all packets 
are delivered with or without consuming the whole retransmission 
budget, 𝑅. To illustrate the impact of retransmission we assume each 
packet to be independent, the successful transfer of a message can 
be modeled with the sum of negative binominal distribution from 
zero to 𝑅 retransmissions, where 𝑞 and 𝑝 are either 𝑞𝑠
 and 𝑝𝑠
 or 𝑞𝑟
and 𝑝𝑟
 depending on if redundant links are used or not. Note that 
even though RSTP uses the retransmission budget 𝑅, it is agnostic to 
how 𝑅 is chosen. The model below is just one example of illustrating 
the impact of 𝑅 on the transfer reliability; future work can explore 
deployment-specific models. 
 
 
∑
𝑃msg success(𝑅) =
𝑘=0
)
(𝑁+𝑘−1
𝑘
𝑝𝑘 𝑞𝑁.
(4)
To exemplify how retransmission can improve reliability, we use 
variable message sizes sent every hundred ms, ranging from 5 MB 
to 0.015 MB. The 5 MB message corresponds to over forty percent 
utilization of a Gigabit Ethernet link, fragmented into more than 3000 
packets, embedded in an equal number of Ethernet frames. The 0.015 
MB message consumes less than one percent of the Gigabit link and 
22 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 12. Expected yearly message loss for messages with varying sizes and retransmission budgets, sent every hundred ms, using single (single) and redundant 
(red) links (network paths). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
fragments into ten packets. We use a conservative BER of 10−10 and cal
culate the expected number of lost messages during a year of operation 
for different retransmission budgets, with a cutoff at 10−12 messages 
lost per year, plotted in Fig.  12.
Fig.  12 shows that the yearly message loss drops rapidly for each 
extra packet retransmission in the retransmission budget, and for 𝑅 ≥ 5, 
the annual loss is less than 10−6 for all message sizes. Hence, it may 
be sufficient for many applications to utilize a single network for state 
transfer, as the retransmission mechanism can provide sufficient mes
saging reliability. However, this would mean that if one link (network 
path) fails, the backup is no longer ready until the link is repaired. 
Whether this is acceptable depends on the application and the domain; 
RSTP supports both. An RSTP channel can be scheduled on all networks 
or a single network.
Redundant links that utilize a redundancy protocol, such as PRP, are 
seen as one link from RSTP. If the deployment requires redundancy to 
function when one of the redundant links has failed, the retransmission 
budget should be set accordingly.
7.2.5. RSTP-PP complexity
The sender need to retrieve packets for transmission based on the 
EDF. Hence, searching/finding the channel with the earliest deadline 
adds complexity, which depend on the underlying data structure, where 
a simple array storage have search complexity 𝑂(𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑛)) if binary search 
is used and insertion/deletion complexity of 𝑂(𝑛) where 𝑛 is number 
of channels, not packets. Finding the packet to send for each packet is 
constant (𝑂(1)) given by the sequence number and the fixed packet size. 
The sender also have to keep track of the state of each channel, trans
mitted and acknowledged packets. Hence, when a acknowledgment is 
received for a channel, the channel need to be found and updated, 
which can be done with a lookup table based on 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 and hence 
constant complexity of 𝑂(1).
On the receiving side, a lookup table based 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 can be used to 
find the designated channel receiver buffer, hence constant in time. 
Acknowledgment packets are additional packets to the payload; the 
payload-to-acknowledgment ratio is discussed in Section 7.3.
7.3. Management mechanism—RSTP-MM
The purpose of the management mechanism is to provide config
uration and management capabilities to RSTP. It is a denoted mecha
nism, as it does not necessitate communication but rather details the 
information and data that RSTP requires, as elaborated below.
We categorized the required RSTP information provided by RSTP
MM into three profiles: (i) node profile, (ii) sender profile, and (iii) 
receiver profile. The sender profile gives the receiver information about 
the sender and vice versa. Currently, all the information is mandatory; 
future work could detail additional optional information that might be 
beneficial.
Do note that exchanging this information over a communication 
channel is not mandated, even if that offers better flexibility. An 
alternative approach would be to provide the information during the 
configuration phase and download it to the respective controllers, 
i.e., the sender (primary) and receiver (backup).
7.3.1. Node profile
The node profile provides RSTP with the necessary node informa
tion, which includes details about the node it is running on.
Mandatory: 𝐿𝐼 is a set of tuples with link information 𝑙𝑖, where 
∀𝑙𝑖 ∈ 𝐿𝐼 are designated to RSTP-PP and 𝑙𝑖 is the link information tuple 
⟨𝐵𝑊,𝑖𝑑⟩ where 𝐵𝑊 is the link bandwidth and 𝑖𝑑 is the link identity.
23 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
7.3.2. Sender profile
The receiver uses the information provided by the sender’s profile, 
i.e., information about the sender that must be made available to the 
receiver.
Mandatory: 𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑆𝑧ℎ𝑡1
 is the default number of payload bytes 
in an RSTP-PP data frame for 𝐻𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒 one. All data packets sent have 
this payload size, except the last one for each 𝑇𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒. The last frame 
carries at most 𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑆𝑧ℎ𝑡1, or less. The exact size is determined using 
number of packets 𝑁 where 𝑁 = ⌈ 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐
𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑆𝑧ℎ𝑡1 
⌉. Hence, the payload size 
of the last packet 𝑠𝑧𝑙𝑝
 is:
𝑠𝑧𝑙𝑝 = 𝑇𝑡𝑙𝑆𝑧𝐶𝑦𝑐 −((𝑁 −1)𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑𝑆𝑧ℎ𝑡1).
7.3.3. Receiver profile
The receiver profile contains information the sender needs to know 
about the receiver.
Mandatory: Receiver link information, 𝑅𝐿𝐼, is a set of tuples, 𝑟𝑙𝑖, 
with link information. The receiver’s 𝐿𝐼 is made available to the sender 
in the receiver’s profile. The sender uses this to determine the end-to
end connection capacity. We do not consider potential reducing factors 
in the network in between; that is, future work. Typically, the 𝑖𝑑 is 
the link’s IP address, and a node has only one link per subnet. Hence, 
pairing links can be done based on subnet belonging. The bandwidth 
capacity is the lowest of 𝑙𝑖𝑖.𝐵𝑊 and 𝑟𝑙𝑖𝑖.𝐵𝑊 for the specific link, 𝑖.
As mentioned, the sender uses 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 for flow control to 
prevent overwhelming the receiver. Hence, the receiver is responsi
ble for providing 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥. Queue sizes on the receiver must be 
large enough to allow 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 packets to be transmitted with
out any losses due to full queues. The value of 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 affects 
 
 𝑎𝑥𝑈𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑, as acknowledgment reception at the sender reduces the 
number of packets in flight (𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡). Preferably, 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 should 
not exceed 𝑖𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 due to lost acknowledgments, as reaching 
 
 𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 pauses sending. Hence, 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑈𝑛𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑑 is set to a fifth of 
 
 𝑛𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 to tolerate some acknowledgment losses without pausing 
sending.
7.4. RSTP design and operation
This section presents an RSTP design. With the design as a foun
dation, we describe RSTP interaction in two use cases: (i) normal 
operation and (ii) (re-)configuration.
7.4.1. RSTP—normal operation
By "normal operation’’, we refer to an operational controller pair 
configured for redundancy. The primary controller manages the pro
cess by executing controller applications and continuously transferring 
the latest application state to the backup. Figs.  13 and 14 provide 
a high-level overview of the send and receive sequences, which are 
further detailed in Figs.  15 and 16, illustrating the internal component 
interactions during normal operation.
As described in Section 2, an application periodically sends its 
updated internal state to the backup during normal operation; step 
(1) in Fig.  15 begins at that point. The example application passes its 
updated state to the RSTP-PP along with the channel ID (𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑). The 
RSTP-PP Buffer handler ensures that a buffer capable of holding all the 
application’s state data is reserved, for example through double-buffer 
handling. Once a buffer has been reserved for the data, the application 
state is copied into that area using the Security handler (step (2)). The
Security handler applies the configured security measures to the state 
data, including authentication and additional security-related metadata 
if needed, as further detailed in Section 7.5.
Once the appropriate security measures have been applied and the 
state data has been copied to the allocated buffer, the updated channel 
data is ready to be queued for transmission (step 3). If data already 
exists for the same channel, for which the transfer has not yet started, 
two alternatives exist: replace the old data or keep both. By default, the 
interpretation is that there is no need to retain the old data for state 
Fig. 13. RSTP-PP primary (sender) sequence diagram.
Fig. 14. RSTP-PP backup (receiver) sequence diagram.
data; therefore, the old buffer is released for reuse, and the updated 
data takes its place. The deadline for the replaced data is preserved, but 
the expiration time is updated. The updated channel data is enqueued, 
and the application execution context has completed its part. It is now 
up to the RSTP-PP sender task to transfer the updated channel data.
Step (4) and the remaining steps are executed by the RSTP-PP 
sender task(s), as shown in Fig.  15. The example design only shows 
one RSTP-PP sender task; dividing it into two or more can increase the 
parallelism, one for acknowledgment handling and one for sending. The 
first action is to retrieve any incoming acknowledgments. The Channel 
sender asks the Link handler to check all links for received acknowl
edgments (steps 4 and 5). The received acknowledgments determine 
whether any channels have been completely transferred (step 6). If a 
channel is completed, the buffer it uses is released (step 7), and the 
application is notified (step 8). The same applies if the deadline expires 
without any acknowledgment; in this case, the buffer is released, and 
the application is notified that the state transfer failed.
The Queue handler returns the next packet to be sent, which can 
be either a retransmission of a previously sent packet (determined to 
24 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 15. RSTP-PP sender design, internal components interaction, and data 
flow during normal operation.
be lost) or a packet from the next channel to be sent (step 9). The
Queue handler uses the same scheduling model as used to determine 
if the channels are schedulable; for this work, it is assumed to be EDF. 
Future work could dig deeper to investigate if there are more suitable 
scheduling alternatives. The Queue handler finds and returns the next 
packet to send according to the scheduling used, i.e., EDF. The packet is 
then passed to the Link handler (step 10) and sent to all links on which 
the channel is scheduled (step 11).
Fig.  16 shows the receiver flow that begins with the Channel receiver
asking the Link handler for new packages. The Link handler checks all 
links and provides the new packages to the Channel receiver (steps 
1 and 2). The received packages are then passed to the Reception 
handler, which checks if the newly received package is the first in 
 
 𝐶𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒 or the first for a channel; in such cases, buffers are allocated 
and reserved accordingly (step 4). As with the sender, a double buffer 
can be a suitable implementation alternative, preserving consistency 
by allowing the application to read from the inactive buffer while 
the Channel receiver updates the active buffer until all packages are 
received; at this point, the active and inactive buffers are swapped.
The application is informed when the Reception handler determines 
that a complete message has been received or that no new messages 
have been received within the expiration time (step 5).
The Reception handler informs the Channel receiver if any acknowl
edgments need to be sent. If so, the Channel receiver uses the Link 
handler to send the acknowledgments (steps 6, 7, and 8). When the 
application is notified of new data (step 5), it retrieves the latest data 
for the specific channel ID (𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑) from RSTP-PP (step 9). The receiving 
application and its sending counterpart must share the same channel ID; 
hence, the channel identity can be part of the application configuration. 
RSTP-PP returns a handle to a buffer that the application uses to access 
the data. This handle is passed to the Security handler (step 10), which 
applies the configured security measures to the received data while 
copying it to application-managed memory. Once this is done, the 
application informs RSTP-PP that the data has been processed, and the 
buffer is freed for reuse (step 11).
We use one RSTP-PP Channel receiver task in the example; a higher 
degree of parallelism is achieved by having two or more tasks, where 
one handles acknowledgment sending and the other handles packet 
reception.
7.4.2. RSTP—configuration
Fig.  17 shows a high-level configuration flow and exemplifies a 
configuration of a redundant controller pair utilizing RSTP. An engi
neer uses an engineering tool to modify the application or create an 
Fig. 16. RSTP-PP receiver design, internal components interaction, and data 
flow during normal operation.
Fig. 17. Configuration example. 
initial version. The tool utilizes the scheduling and reliability models 
presented in Section 7 to determine if the configuration is schedulable 
given the amount of state data, cycle time, deadline, and desired 
reliability (step 1).
Given reliability-related parameters, the reliability model provides 
a retransmission budget (see Section 7.2.4). With preconditions that 
include the retransmission budget, data size, deadline, cycle time, and 
links, the scheduling model determines if it is possible to meet these 
requirements. The scheduling model can also choose the order in which 
to apply the changes during a reconfiguration. To avoid overutilizing 
links during a configuration change, it is essential to apply changes that 
reduce link utilization before those that increase utilization, or perform 
the switch atomically across all applications. The scheduling model 
helps identify changes that reduce link load and those that increase it, 
thereby determining the proper order in which to apply these changes.
When the engineer completes the configuration changes, the changes 
are downloaded to the affected controllers (step 3). The engineering 
tool sends the new configuration to the engineering agent, which 
applies the change (step 4). The change can be applied stepwise by 
first applying changes that reduce link load before applying changes 
that increase load, or atomically for all applications at a specific time. 
Once applied, the applications begin using the new settings (step 5).
It is worth noting that if an application is deleted, it should inform 
RSTP-PP in some manner so that the channel resources, in terms of 
buffers, can be completely deallocated. This is implicit in step 5.
25 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Table 19
Security configurations for the RSTP Security handler. R/O column: R=Re
quired, O=Optional.
Property
R/O
Value 
Integrity mechanism
Encryption mechanism
Replay Protection
Key Exchange
Key Server
Partner Certificate
R
R
R
O
O
O
None, Checksum, Symmetric, Certificate 
None, Symmetric 
None, Counter, Session, Timestamp 
None, KeyServer, IKE 
URL, etc to trusted key server 
(public) certificate of partner 
7.5. Security handling
The function of the Security handler is to add security features as de
fined in Section 5.2.3. Different use cases may require various features. 
Security features will also add to the payload size and execution time 
needed.
The Security handler in the sending and receiving entities is sepa
rated from the RSTP-PP protocol, allowing the application to handle 
any overhead related to security measures instead of RSTP tasks. This 
ensures that the time consumption for tasks related to receiving and 
sending data can be kept down while providing high flexibility in 
selecting the security mechanisms to include.
It is also possible to combine the RSTP-PP protocol with IP-sec, if 
the level of security provided by IPSec is deemed sufficient. In this 
case, the security handler will do nothing, as the operating system 
provides the security functionality. As noted, it may be challenging for 
the application to verify that protection is actually in place when using 
this approach, as the security mechanism is implicitly added outside 
the protocol.
To secure the application layer, the state data is wrapped within a 
security header that contains security-related fragments.
Security mechanisms needed must be indicated as part of the RSTP
Security handler configuration. Table  19 outlines the options required 
to fulfill the previously described security requirements. The list of 
values is, however, not exhaustive; more potential methods exist, and 
several variations of each technique are also available. Quantification 
of security induced latency is future work.
Options for Integrity mechanism indicate how integrity and/or au
thenticity of data is assured. The checksum option will only give a 
basic integrity protection of the data (Sec_Int), the symmetric signature 
will be done using a symmetric key exchanged either by secure key 
server or using a peer-to-peer key establishment protocol such as Inter
net Key Exchange (IKE), which will give some degree of authenticity 
(Sec_Auth), while a certificate-based signature will provide highest level 
of authenticity protection.
The Encryption mechanism option describes whether data encryption 
will be used to fulfill the requirement Sec_Conf, with the options None 
and Symmetric. In reality, this option must be complemented with a 
list of supported symmetric encryption algorithms.
Replay protection outlines how the freshness of data is ensured 
(Sec_Fresh), providing options with static counters, session identities, 
and timestamps.
The Key exchange option defines how the backup and partner ex
change the keys needed for encryption or integrity protection, if based 
on symmetric keys. If the communicating entities are capable of using 
public key cryptography and the communication is peer-to-peer, a 
certificate-based key exchange protocol is advised to be used.
If public-key cryptography is not a viable option, or if there are 
multiple backup entities that should receive state data, the suggested 
scheme is to use a key distribution server to provide symmetric keys 
to the communicating parties. This scheme is inspired by how secure 
OPC UA PubSub [146] works, as shown in Fig.  18. The key distribution 
server can either push keys or the communicating party can fetch them. 
However, communication with the key distribution service needs to be 
encrypted as well as access-controlled, as the keys would otherwise be 
accessible to anyone. The implementation of this protocol is outside 
the scope of the current work, but the suggestion is to follow the 
approach outlined in the OPC UA specification, which also includes 
authentication.
7.6. RSTP—desired feature matching
We conclude the design section by showing how RSTP fulfills the 
desirable features presented in Section 5.2.
Reliability features: RSTP has a mechanism for retransmission, 
with a configurable retransmission budget to provide the desired re
liability; hence, RSTP fully fulfills Rel_RD. RSTP has a mechanism for 
flow control to prevent exhausting receiver buffers; hence, RSTP fully 
fulfills Rel_RC. Finally, since no channel should be deployed on RSTP 
before confirming that it can be scheduled, RSTP avoids overutilization 
of the network; hence, RSTP fully fulfills Rel_NC.
Real-time features: RSTP guarantees that channel messages are 
delivered before their deadline, provided that the channels are suc
cessfully scheduled; hence, RSTP fully fulfills RT_PT. The protocol also 
sets an expiration time for the passed data, meaning that new data is 
expected to arrive before that deadline. If new data is not received in 
time, the consuming application can be informed by RSTP; hence, RSTP 
fully fulfills RT_UE. Lastly, RSTP uses channel concepts and transmits 
packets from the channel closest to the deadline. All channels have 
preallocated buffers at the receiver side, and when a packet is received, 
its payload is stored at the correct offset in the receive buffer. In other 
words, RSTP uses channels and an earliest-deadline-first approach to 
prioritize the channels; hence, RSTP fully fulfills RT_PR.
Security features: The Security Handler allows RSTP to support a 
configurable security level. Thus, it can be configured to fulfill any 
combination of the desired security features, from none to all.
Conclusions:
• RSTP satisfies all required features compared to the protocols 
in Section 5, achieved through conventional mechanisms such 
as flow control combined with novel concepts absent from the 
identified protocols, including:
• A channel-based scheduling concept using EDF, enabling RSTP to 
coordinate the state-transfer needs of multiple concurrent appli
cations.
• A reliability-model-driven retransmission budget that ensures 
known and time-bounded reliability.
8. Deployment and experimental evaluation
This section describes RSTP in a VxWorks deployment, examining 
how an operating system can be configured to align with RSTP. After 
that, we describe an actual implementation of RSTP on VxWorks, which 
we use for experimental evaluation.
8.1. RSTP on vxworks
VxWorks’s default network stack configuration consists of a single 
network stack instance with one network task that serves all outgoing 
and incoming traffic [132]. Fig.  19 shows RSTP and other applications 
on a VxWorks system with the default settings. Using the default 
settings means that one network task handles both time-sensitive and 
time-insensitive communications.
Regarding RSTP and outgoing traffic, RSTP will post a packet on 
the socket for the channel with the highest priority, as described in 
Section 7.4. However, since a single network stack and task serve 
all sockets, that packet might not be handled immediately under the 
default VxWorks settings. The socket-related network job is placed in 
a queue, and the network task processes that queue in a first-in-first
out fashion without any prioritization. The single queue and network 
26 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
Fig. 18. Key distribution according to pattern from OPC UA Secure pub-sub.
Fig. 19. RSTP and other network-dependent applications using the default 
configured VxWorks network stack. RSTP, multiple applications, and Ethernet 
Controllers (EC) share one network stack and Network Task (NetTask).
task may cause a potential latency increase for time-sensitive packets 
due to the processing of time-insensitive traffic ahead in the queue, as 
illustrated in Fig.  19.
The number of network stacks (and tasks) in VxWorks can be 
configured [132]. A feature utilized by Johansson et al. as a foundation 
for processing time-sensitive traffic with a higher-priority network 
task [183]. An application can direct outbound traffic to different 
network stack instances and, consequently, different network tasks by 
assigning the socket to a specific stack instance using socket options.
Fig.  20 shows two stack instances, one for high-priority time
sensitive traffic and one for best-effort traffic. In this example, the 
high-priority network stack serves RSTP, including the Ethernet Con
troller for the RSTP link. The low-priority network task handles time
insensitive data. Note that this configuration can be scaled to include 
additional tasks and priority levels. Fig.  20 serves as an example.
8.2. RSTP experimental implementation
To experimentally evaluate RSTP, we implemented an RSTP sender, 
an RSTP receiver, and a prototype RSTP engineering tool that checks 
schedule feasibility.
Fig. 20. Network-dependent applications using a customized VxWorks net
work stack configuration with a High Priority (HP) network stack instance 
for handling RSTP traffic and a Low Priority (LP) network stack instance for 
best-effort time-insensitive traffic.
RSTP Engineering: The RSTP Engineering prototype is a Python 
script that, given the periodicity, available bandwidth, BER, and state 
size of the applications and the acceptable annual loss, provides the 
channel parameters and checks if the channels are schedulable. It pro
vides output used by the RSTP sender prototype, such as the utilization 
of the links.
RSTP Sender: The RSTP Sender is a simplified version of what is 
depicted in Fig.  15, with the main differences being in the buffer and 
security handling. The prototype does not implement double buffering 
or a security handler. The applications in the evaluation prototype 
provide a state data buffer to be transmitted every period and measure 
the time until RSTP indicates that the transfer is completed. The RSTP
PP data is sent over UDP, with packets transmitted on one UDP port 
and acknowledgments on another. VxWorks is configured according to 
Fig.  20 to prioritize the RSTP traffic.
RSTP Receiver: The RSTP Receiver prototype is a simplified version 
of the receiver depicted in Fig.  16. The prototype omits the security 
handler and buffer management. The application is a placeholder that 
27 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 20
RSTP evaluation configuration for multiple applications (and channels). Each 
application runs in its own task, enabling concurrent RSTP use.
 App. Period Retransmission Size Utilization  (ChId) (deadline) budget (of 1 Gbps) 
 1 10 ms 2 800 B 0.06%  2 20 ms 2 800 B 0.03%  3 50 ms 3 40 kB 0.64%  4 100 ms 3 400 kB 3.2%  5 100 ms 4 800 kB 6.4%  6 200 ms 4 1.6 MB 6.4%  7 500 ms 5 8.0 MB 12.8%  8 500 ms 5 8.0 MB 12.8%  9 500 ms 5 8.0 MB 12.8%  10 500 ms 5 8.0 MB 12.8%  11 1000 ms 5 8.0 MB 6.4% 
 Total size and utilization: 42.8 MB 74.3% 
registers the reception of new state data through a callback call upon 
state reception completion from RSTP.
8.3. RSTP experimental evaluation
We experimentally evaluate RSTP using two state transfer arrange
ments. The first one uses the same state data size selection as we used 
to assess TCP and SCTP in Section 6.4. The second arrangement is a 
multi-application scenario that mimics a controller running multiple 
applications utilizing channels of varying sizes, periods, and dead
lines, corresponding to the combinations of applications with distinct 
periodicity and state sizes, as shown in Table  20.
An application that consists of 100,000 variables, corresponding 
to 0.4 MB of state data, and a period of 100 ms, is considered a 
reasonably large application with a relatively short cycle time for the 
process control domain [21,184]. Moreover, controllers today offer 
varying amounts of memory for application usage; for example, a PM 
891 from ABB offers approximately 200 MB of memory available for 
applications [185], meaning a controller can host many applications 
of the size mentioned above, a limit likely to increase with newer 
generation controllers.
Table  20 summarizes the concurrent multi-application simulation 
configuration, where each application runs as a separate task. Ap
plications 1 and 2 have small data sizes (800 B) and short periods, 
representing a small application or a heartbeat-based failure detection 
utilizing RSTP. Application 3 has a data size of 40 kB and a period 
of 50 ms. Given, as stated above, that an 400 kB application with a 
cycle time of 100 ms is considered large and fast, application 3 serves 
as smaller, but even faster application [21,184]. Application 4 and 5 
have period of 100 ms and a size of 400 kB and 800 kB respectively, 
to serve as examples of fast and large applications. Applications 6–11 
are even larger, but with longer periods. We believe that this selection 
serves as an example that pushes beyond typical utilization, given the 
combination of fast and large concurrent applications. Table  20 lists the 
complete configuration, which yields a payload utilization of 74.3%.
We deliberately avoid going higher to spare some capacity for best
effort traffic as well as the protocol processing-induced transfer time 
overhead. In a real deployment, time-sensitive RSTP traffic would likely 
have precedence over best-effort traffic by using a priority mechanism, 
such as Priority Code Point (PCP) [183].
We ran the evaluation for one hour and collected the minimum, 
maximum, and average application state transfer times. In addition, 
every second, a packet is dropped to simulate a very lossy link and 
utilize the recovery mechanism. The following section, Section 8.4, 
presents the result.
Fig. 21. RSTP max transfer times. First, last, and middle denote if the first, 
last, or middle packets are lost.
8.4. RSTP evaluation results
Fig.  21 shows the RSTP prototype performance under the same 
arrangement previously used to evaluate TCP and SCTP, described in 
Section 6.3. It provides an overview and displays the longest measured 
transfer times, while Table  21 provides the more detailed measure
ments.
For the scenario without packet loss, transferring 1 MB (220 bytes), 
the longest RSTP transfer time is 11 ms, with an average transfer time 
effectively at 10 ms, compared to 9.2 ms for TCP. In the scenario with 
ten packet losses, the RSTP transfer time peaks at 16 ms, whereas 
TCP’s worst-case transfer time occurs for 10 kB and measures over five 
seconds.
Fig.  22 shows the transfer times of RSTP and the optimized config
urations of TCP and SCTP in a single figure. RSTP is slightly slower 
for smaller data sizes; however, this is attributed to an implementation 
property of the proof of concept and is likely to be reduced in a more 
mature implementation. Fig.  23 shows the transfer times under heavy 
loss, with 10 middle packets lost.
While RSTP’s overall throughput without packet losses is somewhat 
lower than TCP, RSTP recovers significantly faster when losses oc
cur. Additionally, RSTP was evaluated on a prototype implementation, 
whereas the TCP implementation is a mature, production-level imple
mentation that is likely to be highly optimized. Hence, the throughput 
of RSTP can most likely be improved with optimization efforts.
Table  22 shows the results from the concurrent multiple-application 
RSTP evaluation arrangement described in Table  20. Transfer times 
increase with higher 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑, likely because channels are processed in 
ascending order of 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 when deadlines are identical. Using 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑 as 
a tiebreaker was deemed sufficient for this proof-of-concept implemen
tation; however, it is a potential area for future work to investigate 
whether there are more suitable alternatives. Alternatives that would 
reduce the increase in transfer time for higher 𝐶ℎ𝐼𝑑.
Additionally, note that deadlines are met even under conditions of 
frequent packet loss, as one packet per second was dropped during the 
one-hour experimental run, causing all channels to experience packet 
loss.
8.5. Discussion of RSTP results
Under no-loss scenarios, RSTP is not as performant as TCP with 
default settings in terms of throughput; however, RSTP is more per
formant than the recovery-optimized TCP. When comparing SCTP and 
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
28 
B. Johansson et al.
Table 21
Transfer times (ms) with minimum, average, and maximum values under packet loss scenarios.
 Size No Loss First pkt. lost Last pkt. lost 1 mid pkt. lost 5 mid pkts. lost 10 mid pkts. lost
 Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max Min Avg Max 
 128 B 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 3.0  256 B 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0  512 B 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0  1 kB 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0  2 kB 1.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 3.0 1.0 1.0 3.0  5 kB 1.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.1 5.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 5.0 1.0 1.0 5.0  10 kB 1.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 3.5 5.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 5.0 1.0 1.0 2.0  25 kB 1.0 1.0 1.0 3.0 3.4 5.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 4.0 3.0 3.9 7.0 2.0 4.0 7.0  50 kB 1.0 1.0 4.0 3.0 3.9 7.0 1.0 1.0 4.0 2.0 2.2 4.0 3.0 3.9 5.0 2.0 3.7 5.0  100 kB 2.0 2.0 4.0 4.0 5.0 5.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 4.0 4.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 7.0 2.0 5.1 7.0  250 kB 3.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 5.1 7.0 3.0 3.0 4.0 4.0 4.1 6.0 5.0 5.1 7.0 4.0 4.6 8.0  500 kB 5.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 7.1 9.0 5.0 5.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 8.0 7.0 7.1 9.0 6.0 7.4 9.0  1 MB 10.0 10.0 11.0 11.0 11.1 13.0 10.0 10.0 10.0 11.0 11.0 13.0 11.0 11.9 14.0 11.0 12.2 16.0 
Fig. 22. RSTP compared with the optimized configurations of TCP and SCTP 
under no-loss conditions, showing transfer times for different data sizes.
Fig. 23. Transfer times of RSTP and the optimized configurations of TCP and 
SCTP under heavy loss conditions (10 middle packets lost), shown for different 
data sizes. As described in Section 6.3, loss of ten middle packets was evaluated 
only for data sizes larger than 10 kB.
Table 22
RSTP multiple applications evaluation result.
 App. Period Size Min Avg Max  (ChId) (deadline) 
 1 10 ms 800 B 0.96 ms 1.16 ms 5.01 ms  2 20 ms 800 B 0.96 ms 2.02 ms 6.00 ms  3 50 ms 40 kB 0.96 ms 2.80 ms 15.99 ms  4 100 ms 400 kB 4.00 ms 10.59 ms 32.00 ms  5 100 ms 800 kB 7.97 ms 13.48 ms 34.03 ms  6 200 ms 1.6 MB 23.00 ms 32.37 ms 104.00 ms  7 500 ms 8.0 MB 77.98 ms 106.16 ms 157.01 ms  8 500 ms 8.0 MB 154.01 ms 213.69 ms 257.01 ms  9 500 ms 8.0 MB 216.98 ms 309.76 ms 363.01 ms  10 500 ms 8.0 MB 282.05 ms 403.81 ms 459.01 ms  11 1000 ms 8.0 MB 456.04 ms 922.46 ms 981.00 ms 
RSTP under no-loss conditions, the optimized version of SCTP outper
forms the non-optimized SCTP configuration. However, the optimized 
SCTP is still less performant than RSTP for larger data sizes. For smaller 
data sizes without losses, both SCTP and TCP are slightly faster than 
RSTP. Again, we believe this is due to specific implementation details 
in the prototype, which could be mitigated with further optimizations. 
Such optimizations are reserved for future work. The protocol is demon
strated to be performant, achieving 75% utilization across multiple 
channels (and applications) under significant loss conditions, as shown 
in the measurements in Table  22. Additionally, RSTP significantly 
reduces the maximum transfer time under loss compared to TCP and 
SCTP.
Regarding multiple application evaluations, all deadlines were suc
cessfully met, as shown in Table  22. However, we conducted the 
evaluation using only one set of concurrent applications, which utilized 
roughly 75% of the available bandwidth. For comparison, as shown 
in Table  15, TCP transfers 1 MB in 9.2 ms under lossless conditions, 
corresponding to roughly 86% utilization of the 1 GB/s link.
The retransmission cost is twofold, since a retransmitted packet 
consumes bandwidth and processing time. To push the RSTP limit even 
closer to the theoretical maximum, the processing of transmission and 
retransmission needs to be analyzed in greater depth, and optimizations 
applied to push the utilization boundaries, thereby enabling tighter 
deadlines.
A transfer-reliability model (Section 7.2.4) estimates the probability 
of state-transfer failure. The retransmission budget balances the trade
off between failure probability and worst-case transfer time. With RSTP 
schedulability checks plus the reliability model, engineers can verify 
at design time whether deadline and reliability targets are achiev
able. Future work is to integrate this analysis into existing toolchains 
and present actionable and guiding outputs to support engineering 
decisions.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
29 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
In addition to the above-mentioned future work, future evaluations 
could include additional application configurations under loss and no
loss conditions. Comparative analyses against other protocols under 
multi-application conditions, including security measures and measur
ing the associated overhead in both lossless and lossy situations, are 
examples of relevant future work.
9. Conclusion
In this work, we have explored checkpointing and state replication 
solutions within both OT and IT contexts. In OT, we investigated check
pointing solutions used in industrial controllers and Programmable 
Logic Controllers (PLCs). In the IT context, we examined checkpointing 
solutions used within container and orchestration environments. CRIU 
was identified as a commonly used solution for retrieving state data; 
however, we also observed that none of the reviewed works specifically 
focused on transferring the retrieved state data. The literature search 
and the outcome of that constitute the first contribution.
The lack of literature detailing state transfer for redundancy pur
poses motivated us to investigate suitable alternatives further. We 
defined a set of desired features for a state transfer protocol that we 
used to evaluate existing protocols against, identifying OPC UA Client
Server, running on top of TCP, and SCTP as relevant candidates. The 
identification of features desired from protocols used for state transfer, 
as well as the matching of existing protocol properties against these 
desired features, constitutes the second contribution.
Considering that OPC UA Client–Server utilizes TCP as its under
lying transport protocol, we compared TCP and SCTP on VxWorks, a 
commonly used real-time operating system, using state transfer simu
lation scenarios. VxWorks allows for customization of TCP and SCTP 
internals, a feature we used to optimize TCP and SCTP settings be
yond the default settings. The TCP configuration optimized for quick 
recovery in the event of losses demonstrated strong performance but 
still suffered from high transfer times under specific loss scenarios. 
Additionally, optimization impacts all TCP connections globally on 
the node. This evaluation, under lossy and no-loss scenarios, using 
optimized and default settings of TCP and SCTP, constitutes the third 
contribution.
To the best of our knowledge, deduced from the findings mentioned 
above, there exists no publicly available protocol targeting state trans
fer for industrial controller redundancy. That finding motivated us to 
design a new protocol for that specific purpose, which we named the 
Reliable State Transfer Protocol (RSTP), explicitly tailored to fulfill all 
desired features, including security. RSTP incorporates a retransmission 
budget, a channel-based concept, and a security handler. Each channel 
is assigned its own period, deadline, and retransmission budget.
A scheduler manages packet transfers based on deadlines, prioritiz
ing packets with the earliest deadlines. Our evaluation demonstrated 
that RSTP handles packet loss scenarios more efficiently than TCP and 
SCTP, although its throughput is somewhat lower than that of TCP. 
Moreover, we evaluated RSTP under a multi-application scenario with 
high utilization (75%), experiencing significant loss to stress recovery 
handling.
We attribute RSTP’s lower throughput compared to TCP to the 
current lack of performance optimizations. Addressing these optimiza
tions remains part of our future work. Future work also includes more 
extensive evaluations involving multiple application scenarios and the 
comprehensive integration of security mechanisms, among other ex
amples. RSTP and the experimental evaluation constitute the fourth 
contribution.
In summary, research on state transfer for spatial redundancy is lim
ited, and existing protocols cover only subsets of the desired features. 
To close these gaps, we introduced RSTP, a schedule-aware state
transfer protocol that fulfills the desired features and, on VxWorks, 
shows lower worst-case transfer times under loss than TCP/SCTP.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Bjarne Johansson: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Björn 
Leander: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Con
ceptualization. Olof Holmgren: Writing – review & editing. Thomas 
Nolte: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Alessandro V. Pa
padopoulos: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Bjarne Johansson has patent STATE TRANSFER SCHEDULING OF IN
TERNAL STATES IN AN INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT pending to ABB 
AB. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] B. Leander, B. Johansson, T. Lindström, O. Holmgren, T. Nolte, A.V. Papadopou
los, Dependability and security aspects of network-centric control, in: 2023 
IEEE 28th International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory 
Automation, ETFA, 2023, pp. 1–8.
[2] D. Bruckner, R. Blair, M. Stanica, A. Ademaj, W. Skeffington, D. Kutscher, 
S. Schriegel, R. Wilmes, K. Wachswender, L. Leurs, et al., Opc ua tsn a new 
solution for industrial communication, Whitepaper. Shap. Group (2018) 1–10.
[3] T. Hegazy, M. Hefeeda, Industrial automation as a cloud service, IEEE Trans. 
Parallel Distrib. Syst. (2014) 2750–2763.
[4] Y. Jia, T. Wang, T. Qiu, X. Zhang, R. Wang, T. Wo, Fault tolerance of 
stateful microservices for industrial edge scenarios, in: 2023 IEEE International 
Conference on Joint Cloud Computing, JCC, IEEE, 2023, pp. 50–56.
[5] B. Johansson, M. Rågberger, T. Nolte, A.V. Papadopoulos, Kubernetes orchestra
tion of high availability distributed control systems, in: 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Technology, ICIT, 2022.
[6] T. Goldschmidt, S. Hauck-Stattelmann, S. Malakuti, S. Grüner, Container-based 
architecture for flexible industrial control applications, J. Syst. Archit. (2018) 
28–36.
[7] H. Koziolek, A. Burger, P. Abdulla, J. Rückert, S. Sonar, P. Rodriguez, Dynamic 
updates of virtual plcs deployed as kubernetes microservices, in: European 
Conference on Software Architecture, Springer, 2021, pp. 3–19.
[8] A. Moga, T. Sivanthi, C. Franke, Os-level virtualization for industrial automation 
systems: Are we there yet? in: Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium 
on Applied Computing, 2016, pp. 1838–1843.
[9] E. Dubrova, Fault-tolerant Design, Springer, 2013.
[10] J. Stój, Cost-effective hot-standby redundancy with synchronization using 
ethercat and real-time ethernet protocols, IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. (2020) 
2035–2047.
[11] A. Simion, C. Bira, A review of redundancy in PLC-based systems, Adv. Top. 
Optoelectron. Microelectron. Nanotechnologies XI (2023) 269–276.
[12] A. Avižienis, Design of fault-tolerant computers, in: Proceedings of the 
November 14-16, 1967, Fall Joint Computer Conference, 1967, pp. 733–743.
[13] J. Losq, Influence of Fault Detection and Switching Mechanisms on the 
Reliability of Stand-By Systems, Digital Systems Laboratory, Stanford Electronics 
Laboratories, Stanford University, 1975.
[14] T. Kampa, A. El-Ankah, D. Grossmann, High availability for virtualized 
programmable logic controllers with hard real-time requirements on cloud 
infrastructures, in: 2023 IEEE 21st International Conference on Industrial 
Informatics, INDIN, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–8.
[15] D. Hallmans, M. Ashjaei, T. Nolte, Analysis of the TSN standards for utilization 
in long-life industrial distributed control systems, in: 2020 IEEE 25th Interna
tional Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA, 
IEEE, 2020, pp. 190–197.
[16] Vxworks - real-time operating system, 2025, (Accessed 15 May 2025), https:
//www.windriver.com/products/vxworks.
[17] D. Bruckner, M.-P. Stănică, R. Blair, S. Schriegel, S. Kehrer, M. Seewald, T. 
Sauter, An introduction to OPC UA TSN for industrial communication systems, 
Proc. IEEE (2019) 1121–1131.
30 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
[18] O-PAS standard, version 2.1, 2025, (Accessed 06 May 2025), https://
publications.opengroup.org/c230.
[19] M.A. Sehr, M. Lohstroh, M. Weber, I. Ugalde, M. Witte, J. Neidig, S. Hoeme, M. 
Niknami, E.A. Lee, Programmable logic controllers in the context of industry 
4.0, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. (2020) 3523–3533.
[20] S. Stattelmann, S. Sehestedt, T. Gamer, Optimized incremental state replication 
for automation controllers, in: 2014 IEEE 19th International Conference on 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[21] H. Koziolek, A. Burger, A.P. Peedikayil, Fast state transfer for updates and live 
migration of industrial controller runtimes in container orchestration systems, 
J. Syst. Softw. (2024).
[22] D. Powell, G. Bonn, D.T. Seaton, P. Verissimo, F. Waeselynck, The Delta-4 
approach to dependability in open distributed computing systems., in: FTCS, 
Citeseer, 1988.
[23] B. Johansson, M. Rågberger, A.V. Papadopoulos, T. Nolte, Heartbeat bully: 
failure detection and redundancy role selection for network-centric controller, 
in: 2020 IEEE the 46th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics 
Society, IECON, IEEE, 2020, pp. 2126–2133.
[24] B. Johansson, M. Rågberger, A.V. Papadopoulos, T. Nolte, Consistency before 
availability: Network reference point based failure detection for controller 
redundancy, in: 2023 IEEE 28th International Conference on Emerging 
Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–8.
[25] ABB webpage - AC 800m high integrity controllers, 2025, (Accessed 27 Au
gust 2025), https://new.abb.com/control-systems/safety-systems/system-800xa
high-integrity/ac-800m-hi-controller.
[26] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, M. Pease, The Byzantine generals problem, ACM Trans. 
Program. Lang. Syst. (1982) 382–401.
[27] N. Budhiraja, K. Marzullo, F.B. Schneider, S. Toueg, The primary-backup 
approach, Distrib. Syst. (1993) 199–216.
[28] L. Lamport, The part-time parliament, ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. (1998) 
133–169.
[29] D. Ongaro, J. Ousterhout, In search of an understandable consensus algorithm, 
in: 2014 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (Usenix ATC 14), 2014, pp. 
305–319.
[30] V. Struhár, M. Behnam, M. Ashjaei, A.V. Papadopoulos, Real-time containers: 
Asurvey, in: 2nd Workshop on Fog Computing and the IoT (Fog-IoT 2020), 
Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2020.
[31] Docker webpage, 2025, (Accessed 02 April 2025), https://www.docker.com/.
[32] Docker CRIU webpage, 2025, (Accessed 04 April 2025), https://docs.docker.
com/reference/cli/docker/checkpoint/.
[33] CRIU webpage, 2025, (Accessed 17 July 2025), https://criu.org/Main_Page.
[34] E. Casalicchio, Container orchestration: A survey, Syst. Model.: Methodol. Tools 
(2019) 221–235.
[35] Kubernetes webpage, 2025, (Accessed 02 April 2025), https://kubernetes.io/.
[36] J. Stój, State machine of a redundant computing unit operating as a cyber
physical system control node with hot-standby redundancy, in: Information 
Systems Architecture and Technology: Proceedings of 40th Anniversary Inter
national Conference on Information Systems Architecture and Technology–ISAT 
2019: Part II, Springer, 2020, pp. 74–85.
[37] Y. Zhao, F. Liu, The implementation of a dual-redundant control system, Control 
Eng. Pract. (2004) 445–453.
[38] R. Ma, P. Cheng, Z. Zhang, W. Liu, Q. Wang, Q. Wei, Stealthy attack against 
redundant controller architecture of industrial cyber-physical system, IEEE 
Internet Things J. (2019) 9783–9793.
[39] B. Johansson, O. Holmgren, T. Nolte, A.V. Papadopoulos, Partible state 
replication for industrial controller redundancy, in: 2024 IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Technology, ICIT, IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–8.
[40] Z. Bakhshi, G. Rodriguez-Navas, H. Hansson, Fault-tolerant permanent stor
age for container-based fog architectures, in: 2021 IEEE 22nd International 
Conference on Industrial Technology, ICIT, IEEE, 2021.
[41] J. Nouruzi-Pur, J. Lambrecht, T.D. Nguyen, A. Vick, J. Krüger, Redundancy 
concepts for real-time cloud-and edge-based control of autonomous mobile 
robots, in: 2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Factory Communication 
Systems, WFCS, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–8.
[42] B. Leander, B. Johansson, S. Mubeen, M. Ashjaei, T. Lindström, Redundancy 
link security analysis: An automation industry perspective, in: 2024 IEEE 29th 
International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 
ETFA, IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–8.
[43] J. Ždánsky, K. Rástočn`y, Influence of redundancy on safety integrity of SRCS 
with safety PLC, in: 2014 ELEKTRO, IEEE, 2014, pp. 508–512.
[44] G.S. OV, A. Karthikeyan, K. Karthikeyan, P. Sanjeevikumar, S.K. Thomas, A. 
Babu, Critical review of SCADA and PLC in smart buildings and energy sector, 
Energy Rep. (2024) 1518–1530.
[45] R. Barkur, S. Shriram, An expeditious method for implementing a full redundant 
drive in hils with the use of PLC and user interface panel, in: 2017 IEEE Trans
portation Electrification Conference and Expo, Asia-Pacific (ITEC Asia-Pacific), 
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[46] M. Nankya, R. Chataut, R. Akl, Securing industrial control systems: components, 
cyber threats, and machine learning-driven defense strategies, Sensors (2023) 
8840.
[47] S. Lee, J. Kang, S.S. Choi, M.T. Lim, Design of PTP TC/slave over seamless 
redundancy network for power utility automation, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 
(2018) 1617–1625.
[48] P. Zhou, W. He, Z. Zhang, The reheating furnace control system design based 
on siemens PCS7, in: 2008 World Automation Congress, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–4.
[49] L. Rajesh, P. Satyanarayana, Dual channel scanning in communication protocol 
in industrial control systems for high availability of the system, Int. J. Tech. 
Phys. Probl. Eng. (2019) 22–27.
[50] J. Luo, M. Kang, E. Bisse, M. Veldink, D. Okunev, S. Kolb, J.G. Tylka, A. Canedo, 
Aquad-redundant plc architecture for cyber-resilient industrial control systems, 
IEEE Embed. Syst. Lett. (2020) 218–221.
[51] M. Wahler, M. Oriol, Disruption-free software updates in automation systems, 
in: 2014 IEEE 19th International Conference on Emerging Technologies and 
Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[52] Y. Kaneko, T. Ito, A reliable cloud-based feedback control system, in: 2016 
IEEE 9th International Conference on Cloud Computing, CLOUD, IEEE, 2016, 
pp. 880–883.
[53] M. Gundall, J. Stegmann, M. Reichardt, H.D. Schotten, Downtime optimized 
live migration of industrial real-time control services, in: 2022 IEEE 31st 
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, ISIE, IEEE, 2022, pp. 
253–260.
[54] K. Govindaraj, A. Artemenko, Container live migration for latency critical 
industrial applications on edge computing, in: 2018 IEEE 23rd International 
Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 
2018, pp. 83–90.
[55] S. Grüner, S. Malakuti, J. Schmitt, T. Terzimehic, M. Wenger, H. Elfaham, 
Alternatives for flexible deployment architectures in industrial automation 
systems, in: 2018 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Emerging Technologies 
and Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2018, pp. 35–42.
[56] L. Vogt, A. Klose, V. Khaydarov, C. Vockeroth, C. Endres, L. Urbas, Towards 
cloud-based control-as-a-service for modular process plants, in: 2023 IEEE 28th 
International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 
ETFA, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–4.
[57] M. Barletta, L. De Simone, R. Della Corte, C. Di Martino, Failover timing 
analysis in orchestrating container-based critical applications, in: 2024 19th 
European Dependable Computing Conference, EDCC, IEEE, 2024, pp. 81–84.
[58] CODESYS redundancy - product data sheet, 2025, (Accessed 22 May 
2025), https://store.codesys.com/media/n98_media_assets/files/2302000040-F/
4/CODESYS%20Redundancy%20SL_en.pdf.
[59] R. Afshari, R.F. Pusparini, M.H. Utomo, F. Dewanta, R.M. Negara, A method for 
microservices handover in a local area network, in: 2020 IEEE 3rd International 
Conference on Computer and Informatics Engineering (IC2IE), IEEE, 2020, pp. 
427–431.
[60] A. Droob, D. Morratz, F.L. Jakobsen, J. Carstensen, M. Mathiesen, R. Bohnstedt, 
M. Albano, S. Moreschini, D. Taibi, Fault tolerant horizontal computation 
offloading, in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Edge Computing and 
Communications, EDGE, IEEE, 2023, pp. 177–182.
[61] C. Pu, H. Xu, H. Jiang, D. Chen, P. Han, An environment-aware and dynamic 
compression-based approach for edge computing service migration, in: 2022 
IEEE 2nd International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer 
Engineering, ICCECE, IEEE, 2022, pp. 292–297.
[62] H. Htet, N. Funabiki, A. Kamoyedji, X. Zhou, M. Kuribayashi, An implemen
tation of job migration function using CRIU and podman in docker-based 
user-PC computing system, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference 
on Computer and Communications Management, ACM, 2021, pp. 92–97.
[63] A. Chebaane, S. Spornraft, A. Khelil, Container-based task offloading for time
critical fog computing, in: 2020 IEEE 3rd 5G World Forum (5GWF), IEEE, 2020, 
pp. 205–211.
[64] Y. Qiu, C.-H. Lung, S. Ajila, P. Srivastava, Experimental evaluation of LXC 
container migration for cloudlets using multipath TCP, Comput. Netw. (2019) 
106900.
[65] J. Guitart, Practicable live container migrations in high performance computing 
clouds: Diskless, iterative, and connection-persistent, J. Syst. Archit. (2024) 
103157.
[66] A. Widjajarto, D.W. Jacob, M. Lubis, Live migration using checkpoint and 
restore in userspace (CRIU): Usage analysis of network, memory and CPU, Bull. 
Electr. Eng. Inform. (2021) 837–847.
[67] S. Mangkhangcharoen, J. Haga, P. Rattanatamrong, Migrating deep learning 
data and applications among kubernetes edge nodes, in: 2021 IEEE 23rd 
International Conference on High Performance Computing, IEEE, 2021, pp. 
2004–2010.
[68] C. Prakash, D. Mishra, P. Kulkarni, U. Bellur, Portkey: Hypervisor-assisted 
container migration in nested cloud environments, in: Proceedings of the 
18th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International Conference on Virtual Execution 
Environments, 2022, pp. 3–17.
[69] A. Bhardwaj, C. Rama Krishna, A container-based technique to improve virtual 
machine migration in cloud computing, IETE J. Res. (2022) 401–416.
[70] D. Zhou, Y. Tamir, Fault-tolerant containers using NiLiCon, in: 2020 IEEE 
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS, IEEE, 
2020, pp. 1082–1091.
31 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
[71] D. Zhou, Y. Tamir, {RRC}: Responsive replicated containers, in: 2022 USENIX 
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 22), 2022, pp. 85–100.
[72] D. Adhipta, S. Sulistyo, W. Widyawan, A process checkpoint evaluation at user 
space of docker framework on distributed computing infrastructure, in: 2020 
IEEE 12th International Conference on Information Technology and Electrical 
Engineering, ICITEE, IEEE, 2020, pp. 141–145.
[73] Z. Khan, F. Abbas, et al., A conceptual framework of virtualization and live
migration for vehicle to infrastructure (v2i) communications, in: 2019 IEEE 11th 
International Conference on Communication Software and Networks, ICCSN, 
IEEE, 2019, pp. 590–594.
[74] R.H. Müller, C. Meinhardt, O.M. Mendizabal, An architecture proposal 
for checkpoint/restore on stateful containers, in: Proceedings of the 37th 
ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, 2022, pp. 267–270.
[75] S. Ramanathan, K. Kondepu, M. Tacca, L. Valcarenghi, M. Razo, A. Fumagalli, 
Container migration of core network component in cloud-native radio access 
network, in: 2020 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Transparent Optical 
Networks, ICTON, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[76] S. Ramanathan, A. Bhattacharyya, K. Kondepu, M. Razo, M. Tacca, L. 
Valcarenghi, A. Fumagalli, Demonstration of containerized central unit live mi
gration in 5G radio access network, in: 2022 IEEE 8th International Conference 
on Network Softwarization (NetSoft), IEEE, 2022, pp. 225–227.
[77] M.V. Ngo, T. Luo, H.T. Hoang, T.Q. Ouek, Coordinated container migration and 
base station handover in mobile edge computing, in: GLOBECOM 2020-2020 
IEEE Global Communications Conference, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[78] P. Karhula, J. Janak, H. Schulzrinne, Checkpointing and migration of IoT edge 
functions, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Edge Systems, 
Analytics and Networking, ACM, 2019, pp. 60–65.
[79] J. Lee, H. Kang, H.-j. Yu, J.-H. Na, J. Kim, J.-h. Shin, S.-Y. Noh, MDB
KCP: persistence framework of in-memory database with CRIU-based container 
checkpoint in kubernetes, J. Cloud Comput. (2024) 124.
[80] R. Stoyanov, M.J. Kollingbaum, Efficient live migration of linux containers, 
in: High Performance Computing: ISC High Performance 2018 International 
Workshops, Revised Selected Papers 33, Springer, 2018, pp. 184–193.
[81] C. Li, J. Tao, G. Shi, J. Zeng, X. Bu, C. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Migration for cloud-native 
VNF in open source MANO, in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Future 
Communications and Networks, FCN, IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[82] A. Bhardwaj, A.P. Singh, P. Sharma, K. Abid, U. Gupta, Performance evaluation 
of virtual machine and container-based migration technique, in: International 
Conference on Data Analytics & Management, Springer, 2023, pp. 551–558.
[83] Z. Di, E. Shao, M. He, Reducing the time of live container migration in a 
workflow, in: IFIP International Conference on Network and Parallel Computing, 
Springer, 2020, pp. 263–275.
[84] S. Oh, J. Kim, Stateful container migration employing checkpoint-based restora
tion for orchestrated container clusters, in: 2018 IEEE International Conference 
on Information and Communication Technology Convergence, ICTC, IEEE, 
2018, pp. 25–30.
[85] H. Schmidt, Z. Rejiba, R. Eidenbenz, K.-T. Förster, Transparent fault tolerance 
for stateful applications in kubernetes with checkpoint/restore, in: 2023 IEEE 
42nd International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, SRDS, IEEE, 
2023, pp. 129–139.
[86] T. Gharaibeh, S. Seiden, M. Abouelsaoud, E. Bou-Harb, I. Baggili, Don’t, stop, 
drop, pause: Forensics of container checkpoints (ConPoint), in: Proceedings 
of the 19th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 
ACM, 2024, pp. 1–11.
[87] G. Venâncio, E.P.D. Junior, Highly available virtual network functions and 
services based on checkpointing/restore, Int. J. Crit. Computer-Based Syst. 
(2024) 115–142.
[88] G. Venâncio, E.P. Duarte Jr., NHAM: an NFV high availability architecture for 
building fault-tolerant stateful virtual functions and services, in: Proceedings 
of the 11th Latin-American Symposium on Dependable Computing, 2022, pp. 
35–44.
[89] L.A. Vayghan, M.A. Saied, M. Toeroe, F. Khendek, A kubernetes controller for 
managing the availability of elastic microservice based stateful applications, J. 
Syst. Softw. (2021) 110924.
[90] L.A. Vayghan, M.A. Saied, M. Toeroe, F. Khendek, Microservice based archi
tecture: Towards high-availability for stateful applications with kubernetes, in: 
2019 IEEE 19th International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and 
Security, QRS, IEEE, 2019, pp. 176–185.
[91] M. Arif, K. Assogba, M.M. Rafique, Canary: fault-tolerant faas for stateful time
sensitive applications, in: SC22: International Conference for High Performance 
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–16.
[92] S. Zhang, N. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Xue, R. Huang, A high-performance adap
tive strategy of container checkpoint based on pre-replication, in: Security, 
Privacy, and Anonymity in Computation, Communication, and Storage: 11th 
International Conference and Satellite Workshops, Springer, 2018, pp. 240–250.
[93] R.S. Venkatesh, T. Smejkal, D.S. Milojicic, A. Gavrilovska, Fast in-memory 
CRIU for docker containers, in: Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on Memory Systems, ACM, 2019, pp. 53–65.
[94] Z. Yu, K. He, C. Chen, J. Wang, Live container migration via pre-restore and 
random access memory, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Parallel 
&Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud Computing, 
Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing & Networking 
(ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom), IEEE, 2020, pp. 102–109.
[95] Y. Han, M. Oh, J. Lee, S. Yoo, B.S. Kim, J. Choi, Achieving performance 
isolation in docker environments with ZNS ssds, in: 2023 IEEE 12th Non
Volatile Memory Systems and Applications Symposium, NVMSA, IEEE, 2023, 
pp. 25–31.
[96] P.S. Junior, D. Miorandi, G. Pierre, Stateful container migration in geo
distributed environments, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Cloud 
Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), IEEE, 2020, pp. 49–56.
[97] G.L. Stavrinides, H.D. Karatza, Fault-tolerant orchestration of bags-of-tasks with 
application-directed checkpointing in a distributed environment, in: 2021 IEEE 
International Conference on Communications, Computing, Cybersecurity, and 
Informatics, CCCI, IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[98] W. Cai, H. Chen, Z. Zhuo, Z. Wang, N. An, Flexible supervision system: A fast 
fault-tolerance strategy for cloud applications in cloud-edge collaborative envi
ronments, in: IFIP International Conference on Network and Parallel Computing, 
Springer, 2022, pp. 108–113.
[99] S.-H. Choi, K.-W. Park, icontainer: Consecutive checkpointing with rapid 
resilience for immortal container-based services, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 
(2022).
[100] T. Louati, H. Abbes, C. Cérin, M. Jemni, Lxcloud-cr: towards linux containers 
distributed hash table based checkpoint-restart, J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 
(2018) 187–205.
[101] S. Behera, L. Wan, F. Mueller, M. Wolf, S. Klasky, Orchestrating fault prediction 
with live migration and checkpointing, in: Proceedings of the 29th International 
Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2020, pp. 
167–171.
[102] P. Denzler, D. Ramsauer, T. Preindl, W. Kastner, A. Gschnitzer, Comparing 
different persistent storage approaches for containerized stateful applications, 
in: 2022 IEEE 27th International Conference on Emerging Technologies and 
Factory Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–8.
[103] Z. Bakhshi, G. Rodriguez-Navas, H. Hansson, Analyzing the performance of 
persistent storage for fault-tolerant stateful fog applications, J. Syst. Archit. 
(2023) 103004.
[104] H.V. Netto, A.F. Luiz, M. Correia, L. de Oliveira Rech, C.P. Oliveira, Koordi
nator: A service approach for replicating docker containers in kubernetes, in: 
2018 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications, ISCC, IEEE, 2018, 
pp. 00058–00063.
[105] A. Javed, K. Heljanko, A. Buda, K. Främling, CefIoT: A fault-tolerant IoT 
architecture for edge and cloud, in: 2018 IEEE 4th World Forum on Internet 
of Things (WF-IoT), IEEE, 2018, pp. 813–818.
[106] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M.J. Handley, O. Bonaventure, C. Paasch, TCP Extensions 
for Multipath Operation with Multiple Addresses, 2020, URL https://www.rfc
editor.org/info/rfc8684, RFC 8684.
[107] A. Barak, O. La’adan, The MOSIX multicomputer operating system for high 
performance cluster computing, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. (1998) 361–372.
[108] Z. Bakhshi, G. Rodriguez-Navas, H. Hansson, Using UPPAAL to verify recovery 
in a fault-tolerant mechanism providing persistent state at the edge, in: 2021 
IEEE 26th International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory 
Automation, ETFA, IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[109] P.W. Li, H.L. Zhao, H.T. Yang, S. Sun, Performance evaluation of transport 
protocol in data distribution service middleware, Adv. Mater. Res. (2014) 
1984–1987.
[110] M.A. Azad, R. Mahmood, T. Mehmood, A comparative analysis of DCCP variants 
(CCID2, CCID3), TCP and UDP for MPEG4 video applications, in: 2009 IEEE 
International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies, 
IEEE, 2009, pp. 40–45.
[111] P. Papadimitriou, V. Tsaoussidis, Assessment of internet voice transport with 
TCP, Int. J. Commun. Syst. (2006) 381–405.
[112] Y. Sahraoui, A. Ghanam, S. Zaidi, S. Bitam, A. Mellouk, Performance evaluation 
of TCP and UDP based video streaming in vehicular ad-hoc networks, in: 
2018 IEEE International Conference on Smart Communications in Network 
Technologies (SaCoNeT), IEEE, 2018, pp. 67–72.
[113] Y. Wang, A.A. Abouzeid, RCP: A reinforcement learning-based retransmission 
control protocol for delivery and latency sensitive applications, in: 2021 
International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks, ICCCN, 
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–9.
[114] S. Asodi, S.V. Ganesh, E. Seshadri, P. Singh, Evaluation of transport layer 
protocols for voice transmission in various network scenarios, in: 2009 Second 
International Conference on the Applications of Digital Information and Web 
Technologies, IEEE, 2009, pp. 238–242.
[115] M.N. Tahir, M. Katz, ITS performance evaluation in direct short-range commu
nication (ieee 802.11 p) and cellular network (5G)(TCP vs UDP), in: Towards 
Connected and Autonomous Vehicle Highways: Technical, Security and Social 
Challenges, Springer, 2021, pp. 257–279.
[116] O. Ali, A. Aghmadi, O.A. Mohammed, Performance evaluation of commu
nication networks for networked microgrids, E-Prime-Advances Electr. Eng. 
Electron. Energy (2024).
32 
B. Johansson et al.
Journal of Systems Architecture 178 (2026) 103872 
[117] L. Cottrell, Characterization and Evaluation of TCP and UDP-based Transport 
on Real Networks, Tech. rep., SLAC National Accelerator Lab., Menlo Park, CA 
(United States), 2005.
[118] M. Lulling, J. Vaughan, A simulation-based comparative evaluation of transport 
protocols for SIP, Comput. Commun. (2006) 525–537.
[119] M. Allman, V. Paxson, E. Blanton, TCP Congestion Control, Tech. rep., 2009.
[120] D. Bertsekas, R. Gallager, Data Networks, Athena Scientific, 2021.
[121] B. Turkovic, F.A. Kuipers, S. Uhlig, Fifty shades of congestion control: A 
performance and interactions evaluation, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.
03852.
[122] IEC 62443-4-2 Security for Industrial Automation and Control Systems Part 4-2: 
Technical security requirements for IACS components, Standard, International 
Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, CH, 2009-2018.
[123] W. Eddy, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), 2022, URL https://www.rfc
editor.org/info/rfc9293, RFC 9293.
[124] M. Scharf, S. Kiesel, NXG03-5: Head-of-line blocking in TCP and SCTP: Analysis 
and measurements, in: IEEE Globecom 2006, IEEE, 2006, pp. 1–5.
[125] User Datagram Protocol, 1980, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc768, 
RFC 768.
[126] J.P. Macker, C. Bormann, M.J. Handley, B. Adamson, NACK-Oriented Reliable 
Multicast (NORM) Transport Protocol, 2009, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/
info/rfc5740, RFC 5740.
[127] H. Schulzrinne, S.L. Casner, R. Frederick, V. Jacobson, RTP: A Transport 
Protocol for Real-Time Applications, 2003, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/
info/rfc3550, RFC 3550.
[128] E. Carrara, K. Norrman, D. McGrew, M. Naslund, M. Baugher, The Secure Real
time Transport Protocol (SRTP), 2004, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
rfc3711, RFC 3711.
[129] R.R. Stewart, M. Tüxen, K. Nielsen, Stream Control Transmission Protocol, 2022, 
URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9260, RFC 9260.
[130] Sctp - linux manual page, 2024, (Accessed 20 November 2024), https://man7.
org/linux/man-pages/man7/sctp.7.html.
[131] Sctplib - windows SCTP driver, 2024, (Accessed 20 November 2024), https:
//github.com/dreibh/sctplib/blob/master/README.win32.
[132] Vxworks - network stack programmer’s guide. Supported RFCs, 2024, (Ac
cessed 20 November 2024), https://docs.windriver.com/r/bundle/Network_
Stack_Programmers_Guide_Edition_17_1/page/1591988.html.
[133] A. Jungmaier, E. Rescorla, M. Tüxen, Transport Layer Security over Stream Con
trol Transmission Protocol, 2002, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3436, 
RFC 3436.
[134] M. Tüxen, E. Rescorla, R. Seggelmann, Datagram Transport Layer Security 
(DTLS) for Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), 2011, http://dx.
doi.org/10.17487/RFC6083, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6083, RFC 
6083.
[135] A. Langley, A. Riddoch, A. Wilk, A. Vicente, C. Krasic, D. Zhang, F. Yang, F. 
Kouranov, I. Swett, J. Iyengar, et al., The quic transport protocol: Design and 
internet-scale deployment, in: Proceedings of the Conference of the ACM Special 
Interest Group on Data Communication, 2017, pp. 183–196.
[136] J. Iyengar, M. Thomson, QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport, 
2021, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000, RFC 9000.
[137] J. Iyengar, I. Swett, QUIC Loss Detection and Congestion Control, 2021, URL 
https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9002, RFC 9002.
[138] OMG data distribution service version: 1.4, 2024, (Accessed 19 November 
2024), https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/PDF.
[139] The real-time publish-subscribe protocol DDS interoperability wire protocol 
(DDSI-RTPSTM) specification version: 2.5, 2024, (Accessed 19 November 2024), 
https://www.omg.org/spec/DDSI-RTPS/2.5/PDF.
[140] DDS extensions for time sensitive networking version: 1.0 - beta 1, 2024, (Ac
cessed 20 November 2024), https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS-TSN/1.0/Beta1/
PDF.
[141] DDS security version 1.2, 2025, (Accessed 13 May 2025), https://www.omg.
org/spec/DDS-SECURITY/1.2/PDF.
[142] OPC 10000-1 - UA specification part 1: Overview and concepts, 2025, (Accessed 
05 May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part1/v105/docs/.
[143] OPC 10000-4 - UA specification part 4: Services 1.05.03, 2025, (Accessed 05 
May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v105/docs/.
[144] OPC 10000-2 - UA specification part 2: Security 1.05.04, 2025, (Accessed 14 
May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part2/v105/docs/.
[145] OPC 10000-6 - UA specification part 6: Mappings 1.05.03, 2025, (Accessed 05 
May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part6/v105/docs/.
[146] OPC 10000-14 - UA specification part 14: PubSub 1.05.03, 2025, (Accessed 05 
May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part14/v105/docs/.
[147] OPC 10000-22 - UA specification part 22: Base network model 1.05.03, 2025, 
(Accessed 05 May 2025), https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part22/
v105/docs/.
[148] T. Bova, T. Krivoruchka, RELIABLE UDP PROTOCOL, Internet Draft draft
ietf-sigtran-reliable-udp-00, Internet Engineering Task Force, 1999, URL https:
//datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sigtran-reliable-udp/00/, Work in Progress.
[149] E. He, J. Leigh, O. Yu, T.A. DeFanti, Reliable blast UDP: Predictable high 
performance bulk data transfer, in: 2002 IEEE International Conference on 
Cluster Computing, IEEE, 2002, pp. 317–324.
[150] B. Eckart, X. He, Q. Wu, Performance adaptive UDP for high-speed bulk data 
transfer over dedicated links, in: 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Parallel 
and Distributed Processing, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–10.
[151] Y. Gu, R.L. Grossman, UDT: UDP-based data transfer for high-speed wide area 
networks, Comput. Netw. (2007) 1777–1799.
[152] A.O.F. Atya, J. Kuang, RUFC: A flexible framework for reliable UDP with flow 
control, in: 2013 IEEE 8th International Conference for Internet Technology and 
Secured Transactions (ICITST-2013), IEEE, 2013, pp. 276–281.
[153] R.L. Grossman, M. Mazzucco, H. Sivakumar, Y. Pan, Q. Zhang, Simple 
available bandwidth utilization library for high-speed wide area networks, J. 
Supercomput. (2005) 231–242.
[154] M.R. Meiss, Tsunami: A High-Speed Rate-Controlled Protocol for File Transfer, 
Indiana University, 2004.
[155] AMPQ: Advanced message queuing protocol, 2024, (Accessed 04 November 
2024), https://www.amqp.org/.
[156] Z. Shelby, The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), Tech. rep., IETF RFC 
7252, 2014.
[157] S. Floyd, M.J. Handley, E. Kohler, Datagram Congestion Control Protocol 
(DCCP), 2006, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4340, RFC 4340.
[158] L. Eggert, G. Fairhurst, G. Shepherd, UDP Usage Guidelines, 2017, URL https:
//www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8085, RFC 8085.
[159] M.J. Handley, J. Padhye, S. Floyd, J. Widmer, TCP Friendly Rate Control 
(TFRC): Protocol Specification, 2008, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
rfc5348, RFC 5348.
[160] A. Elghazi, M. Berrezzouq, Z. Abdelali, New version of iSCSI protocol to 
secure cloud data storage, in: 2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference on 
Cloud Computing Technologies and Applications (CloudTech), IEEE, 2016, pp. 
141–145.
[161] IBM aspera - product webpage, 2024, (Accessed 05 December 2024), https:
//www.ibm.com/products/aspera.
[162] MQTT: Message queue telemetry transport, 2024, (Accessed 04 November 
2024), https://mqtt.org/.
[163] J. Hu, H. Shen, X. Liu, J. Wang, RDMA transports in datacenter networks: 
Survey, IEEE Netw. (2024).
[164] The RoCE initiative, 2024, (Accessed 04 November 2024), https://www.
roceinitiative.org/.
[165] U. Abbasi, E.H. Bourhim, M. Dieye, H. Elbiaze, A performance comparison of 
container networking alternatives, IEEE Netw. (2019) 178–185.
[166] M. Shaikh, P. Shah, R. Sekhar, Communication protocols in industry 4.0, 
in: 2023 International Conference on Sustainable Emerging Innovations in 
Engineering and Technology, ICSEIET, IEEE, 2023, pp. 709–714.
[167] HMS, Industrial network market shares 2025 according to HMS networks, 
2025, (Accessed 04 June 2025), https://www.hms-networks.com/news/news
details/27-05-2025-hms-networks-report-industrial-trends-2025.
[168] R. Zurawski, Industrial Communication Technology Handbook, CRC Press, 
2014.
[169] G. Prytz, A performance analysis of ethercat and PROFINET IRT, in: 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 
IEEE, 2008, pp. 408–415.
[170] Transmission control protocol, 1981, http://dx.doi.org/10.17487/RFC0793, 
URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793, RFC 793.
[171] S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, D.A. Romanow, TCP Selective Acknowl
edgment Options, 1996, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2018, RFC 
2018.
[172] E. Blanton, D.V. Paxson, M. Allman, TCP Congestion Control, 2009, URL 
https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5681, RFC 5681.
[173] M. Sargent, J. Chu, D.V. Paxson, M. Allman, Computing TCP’s Retransmission 
Timer, 2011, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6298, RFC 6298.
[174] S.O. Bradner, Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels, 1997, 
URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119, RFC 2119.
[175] R.R. Stewart, Stream Control Transmission Protocol, 2007, URL https://www.
rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4960, RFC 4960.
[176] J. Pastor, M.-C. Belinchon, Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) 
Management Information Base (MIB), 2004, URL https://www.rfc-editor.org/
info/rfc3873, RFC 3873.
[177] M. Tüxen, V. Yasevich, P. Lei, R.R. Stewart, K. Poon, Sockets API Extensions for 
the Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), 2011, URL https://www.rfc
editor.org/info/rfc6458, RFC 6458.
[178] C.L. Liu, J.W. Layland, Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a 
hard-real-time environment, J. ACM (1973) 46–61.
[179] Q. Zheng, K.G. Shin, On the ability of establishing real-time channels 
in point-to-point packet-switched networks, IEEE Trans. Commun. (1994) 
1096–1105.
[180] Siemens, Siemens system manual S7-1500r/h redundant system, 2024, 
(Accessed 28 January 2026), https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/
api/uuid:7506b4b1-8261-4942-9346-7c28d6951ff0/s71500rh-manual-en-us-en
us.pdf.